<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough (Third Edition, Vol. 6 of 12)</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="3">Edition 3</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>January 26, 2013</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">41923</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2013-01-26">January 26, 2013</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Magic and Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor of Social Anthropology in the University of Liverpool</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. VI. of XII.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Part IV: Adonis Attis Osiris.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. 2 of 2.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1911</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
</div>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The Myth Of Osiris.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris the
Egyptian
counterpart
of
Adonis
and Attis.</note>
In ancient Egypt the god whose death and resurrection were
annually celebrated with alternate sorrow and joy was
Osiris, the most popular of all Egyptian deities; and there
are good grounds for classing him in one of his aspects with
Adonis and Attis as a personification of the great yearly
vicissitudes of nature, especially of the corn. But the immense
vogue which he enjoyed for many ages induced his devoted
worshippers to heap upon him the attributes and powers
of many other gods; so that it is not always easy to strip
him, so to say, of his borrowed plumes and to restore them
to their proper owners. In the following pages I do not
pretend to enumerate and analyse all the alien elements
which thus gathered round the popular deity. All that I
shall attempt to do is to peel off these accretions and to
exhibit the god, as far as possible, in his primitive simplicity.
The discoveries of recent years in Egypt enable us to do so
with more confidence now than when I first addressed myself
to the problem many years ago.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The myth
of Osiris. The
Pyramid
Texts.</note>
The story of Osiris is told in a connected form only
by Plutarch, whose narrative has been confirmed and
to some extent amplified in modern times by the evidence
of the monuments.<note place='foot'>See Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>,
12-20; R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di
Mitologia Egizia</hi> (Turin, 1881-1884),
vol. ii. pp. 692 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben im
Altertum</hi> (Tübingen, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 365-369;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1909), pp. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A.
Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten
Ägypter</hi> (Münster i. W. 1890), pp.
109 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi> (London, 1897), pp. 207
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne
des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 172
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods
of the Egyptians</hi> (London, 1904), ii.
123 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi> (London, 1911), i. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Of the monuments which illustrate
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
the myth or legend of Osiris the oldest are a long
series of hymns, prayers, incantations, and liturgies, which
have been found engraved in hieroglyphics on the walls,
passages, and galleries of five pyramids at Sakkara. From
the place where they were discovered these ancient religious
records are known as the Pyramid Texts. They
date from the fifth and sixth dynasties, and the period
of time during which they were carved on the pyramids
is believed to have been roughly a hundred and fifty
years from about the year 2625 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> onward. But from
their contents it appears that many of these documents
were drawn up much earlier; for in some of them there
are references to works which have perished, and in others
there are political allusions which seem to show that the
passages containing them must have been composed at
a time when the Northern and Southern Kingdoms
were still independent and hostile states and had not yet
coalesced into a single realm under the sway of one powerful
monarch. As the union of the kingdoms appears
to have taken place about three thousand four hundred
years before our era, the whole period covered by the composition
of the Pyramid Texts probably did not fall short of
a thousand years. Thus the documents form the oldest
body of religious literature surviving to us from the ancient
world, and occupy a place in the history of Egyptian language
and civilization like that which the Vedic hymns and
incantations occupy in the history of Aryan speech and
culture.<note place='foot'>J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>Development of
Religion and Thought in Ancient
Egypt</hi> (London, 1912), pp. vii. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 77
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 84 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>History
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London,
1908), p. 68; Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des
Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. A.
Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi> (London, 1911), i. 100
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The first series of the texts was
discovered in 1880 when Mariette's
workmen penetrated into the pyramid
of King Pepi the First. Till then it
had been thought by modern scholars
that the pyramids were destitute of
inscriptions. The first to edit the
Pyramid Texts was Sir Gaston Maspero.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Pyramid
Texts
intended
to ensure
the blissful
immortality
of
Egyptian
kings.</note>
The special purpose for which these texts were engraved
on the pyramids was to ensure the eternal life and felicity
of the dead kings who slept beneath these colossal monuments.
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
Hence the dominant note that sounds through
them all is an insistent, a passionate protest against the
reality of death: indeed the word death never occurs in the
Pyramid Texts except to be scornfully denied or to be
applied to an enemy. Again and again the indomitable
assurance is repeated that the dead man did not die but
lives. <q>King Teti has not died the death, he has become
a glorious one in the horizon.</q> <q>Ho! King Unis! Thou
didst not depart dead, thou didst depart living.</q> <q>Thou
hast departed that thou mightest live, thou hast not departed
that thou mightest die.</q> <q>Thou diest not.</q> <q>This
King Pepi dies not.</q> <q>Have ye said that he would die?
He dies not; this King Pepi lives for ever.</q> <q>Live! Thou
shalt not die.</q> <q>Thou livest, thou livest, raise thee up.</q>
<q>Thou diest not, stand up, raise thee up.</q> <q>O lofty one
among the Imperishable Stars, thou perishest not eternally.</q><note place='foot'>J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>Development of
Religion and Thought in Ancient
Egypt</hi>, pp. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Among the earlier
works referred to in the Pyramid Texts
are <q>the chapter of those who ascend</q>
and <q>the chapter of those who raise
themselves up</q> (J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 85). From their titles these
works would seem to have recorded a
belief in the resurrection and ascension
of the dead.</note>
Thus for Egyptian kings death was swallowed up
in victory; and through their tears Egyptian mourners
might ask, like Christian mourners thousands of years afterwards,
<q>O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is
thy victory?</q>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
story of
Osiris
in the
Pyramid
Texts.</note>
Now it is significant that in these ancient documents,
though the myth or legend of Osiris is not set forth at
length, it is often alluded to as if it were a matter of common
knowledge. Hence we may legitimately infer the
great antiquity of the Osirian tradition in Egypt. Indeed
so numerous are the allusions to it in the Pyramid Texts
that by their help we could reconstruct the story in its main
outlines even without the narrative of Plutarch.<note place='foot'>This has been done by Professor
J. H. Breasted in his <hi rend='italic'>Development of
Religion and Thought in Ancient
Egypt</hi>, pp. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus the
discovery of these texts has confirmed our belief in the
accuracy and fidelity of the Greek writer, and we may
accept his account with confidence even when it records
incidents or details which have not yet been verified by a
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
comparison with original Egyptian sources. The tragic
tale runs thus:
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris a
son of the
earth-god
and the
sky-goddess.</note>
Osiris was the offspring of an intrigue between the
earth-god Seb (Keb or Geb, as the name is sometimes transliterated)
and the sky-goddess Nut. The Greeks identified
his parents with their own deities Cronus and Rhea. When
the sun-god Ra perceived that his wife Nut had been unfaithful
to him, he declared with a curse that she should be
delivered of the child in no month and no year. But the
goddess had another lover, the god Thoth or Hermes, as the
Greeks called him, and he playing at draughts with the
moon won from her a seventy-second part<note place='foot'>In Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 12, we
must clearly read ἑβδομηκοστὸν δεύτερον
with Scaliger and Wyttenbach for the
ἑβδομηκοστόν of the MSS.</note> of every day,
and having compounded five whole days out of these parts
he added them to the Egyptian year of three hundred and
sixty days. This was the mythical origin of the five supplementary
days which the Egyptians annually inserted at the
end of every year in order to establish a harmony between
lunar and solar time.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 4, with A. Wiedemann's
note; L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der
mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</hi>
(Berlin, 1825-1826), i. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp. 468 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G.
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples
de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On these five days, regarded as
outside the year of twelve months, the curse of the sun-god
did not rest, and accordingly Osiris was born on the first of
them. At his nativity a voice rang out proclaiming that the
Lord of All had come into the world. Some say that a
certain Pamyles heard a voice from the temple at Thebes
bidding him announce with a shout that a great king, the
beneficent Osiris, was born. But Osiris was not the only
child of his mother. On the second of the supplementary
days she gave birth to the elder Horus, on the third to the
god Set, whom the Greeks called Typhon, on the fourth to
the goddess Isis, and on the fifth to the goddess Nephthys.<note place='foot'>The birth of the five deities on the
five supplementary days is mentioned
by Diodorus Siculus (i. 13. 4) as well
as by Plutarch (<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 12).
The memory of the five supplementary
days seems to survive in the modern
Coptic calendar of Egypt. The days
from the first to the sixth of Amshir
(February) are called <q>the days outside
the year</q> and they are deemed unlucky.
<q>Any child begotten during
these days will infallibly be misshapen
or abnormally tall or short. This also
applies to animals so that cattle and
mares are not covered during these
days; moreover, some say (though
others deny) that neither sowing nor
planting should be undertaken.</q> However,
these unlucky days are not the
true intercalary days of the Coptic
calendar, which occur in the second
week of September at the end of the
Coptic year. See C. G. Seligmann,
<q>Ancient Egyptian Beliefs in Modern
Egypt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Essays and Studies presented to
William Ridgeway</hi> (Cambridge, 1913),
p. 456. As to the unluckiness of
intercalary days in general, see <hi rend='italic'>The
Scapegoat</hi>, pp. 339 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
Afterwards Set married his sister Nephthys, and Osiris
married his sister Isis.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris
introduces
the
cultivation
of corn and
of the vine.
His violent
death. Isis
searches
for his
body.</note>
Reigning as a king on earth, Osiris reclaimed the
Egyptians from savagery, gave them laws, and taught them
to worship the gods. Before his time the Egyptians had
been cannibals. But Isis, the sister and wife of Osiris,
discovered wheat and barley growing wild, and Osiris introduced
the cultivation of these grains amongst his people,
who forthwith abandoned cannibalism and took kindly to a
corn diet. Moreover, Osiris is said to have been the first
to gather fruit from trees, to train the vine to poles, and to
tread the grapes. Eager to communicate these beneficent
discoveries to all mankind, he committed the whole government
of Egypt to his wife Isis, and travelled over the world,
diffusing the blessings of civilization and agriculture wherever
he went. In countries where a harsh climate or niggardly
soil forbade the cultivation of the vine, he taught the inhabitants
to console themselves for the want of wine by
brewing beer from barley. Loaded with the wealth that had
been showered upon him by grateful nations, he returned to
Egypt, and on account of the benefits he had conferred on
mankind he was unanimously hailed and worshipped as a
deity.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 13; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 14, 17, 20; Tibullus,
i. 7. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But his brother Set (whom the Greeks called
Typhon) with seventy-two others plotted against him.
Having taken the measure of his good brother's body by
stealth, the bad brother Typhon fashioned and highly decorated
a coffer of the same size, and once when they were all
drinking and making merry he brought in the coffer and
jestingly promised to give it to the one whom it should fit
exactly. Well, they all tried one after the other, but it fitted
none of them. Last of all Osiris stepped into it and lay down.
On that the conspirators ran and slammed the lid down on
him, nailed it fast, soldered it with molten lead, and flung the
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
coffer into the Nile. This happened on the seventeenth day
of the month Athyr, when the sun is in the sign of the
Scorpion, and in the eight-and-twentieth year of the reign or
the life of Osiris. When Isis heard of it she sheared off
a lock of her hair, put on mourning attire, and wandered
disconsolately up and down, seeking the body.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>She takes
refuge
in the
papyrus
swamps.
Isis and
her infant
son Horus.</note>
By the advice of the god of wisdom she took refuge
in the papyrus swamps of the Delta. Seven scorpions
accompanied her in her flight. One evening when she
was weary she came to the house of a woman, who,
alarmed at the sight of the scorpions, shut the door in her
face. Then one of the scorpions crept under the door and
stung the child of the woman that he died. But when Isis
heard the mother's lamentation, her heart was touched, and
she laid her hands on the child and uttered her powerful
spells; so the poison was driven out of the child and he
lived. Afterwards Isis herself gave birth to a son in the
swamps. She had conceived him while she fluttered in the
form of a hawk over the corpse of her dead husband. The
infant was the younger Horus, who in his youth bore the
name of Harpocrates, that is, the child Horus. Him Buto,
the goddess of the north, hid from the wrath of his wicked
uncle Set. Yet she could not guard him from all mishap;
for one day when Isis came to her little son's hiding-place
she found him stretched lifeless and rigid on the ground: a
scorpion had stung him. Then Isis prayed to the sun-god
Ra for help. The god hearkened to her and staid his bark
in the sky, and sent down Thoth to teach her the spell by
which she might restore her son to life. She uttered the
words of power, and straightway the poison flowed from
the body of Horus, air passed into him, and he lived. Then
Thoth ascended up into the sky and took his place once
more in the bark of the sun, and the bright pomp passed
onward jubilant.<note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, p. 366;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Berlin,
1909), p. 40; A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London,
1897), pp. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>, i. 487 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
ii. 206-211; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi> (London, 1911), i. 92-96,
ii. 84, 274-276. These incidents of
the scorpions are not related by Plutarch
but are known to us from Egyptian
sources. The barbarous legend of the
begetting of Horus by the dead Osiris
is told in unambiguous language in the
Pyramid Texts, and it is illustrated by
a monument which represents the two
sister goddesses hovering in the likeness
of hawks over the god, while
Hathor sits at his head and the Frog-goddess
Heqet squats in the form of a
huge frog at his feet. See J. H. Breasted,
<hi rend='italic'>Development of Religion and Thought
in Ancient Egypt</hi>, p. 28, with note 2;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 280.
Harpocrates is in Egyptian <hi rend='italic'>Her-pe-khred</hi>,
<q>Horus the child</q> (A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>,
p. 223). Plutarch, who appears to
distinguish him from Horus, says that
Harpocrates was begotten by the dead
Osiris on Isis, and that he was born
untimely and was weak in his lower
limbs (<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 19). Elsewhere
he tells us that Harpocrates <q>was
born, incomplete and youthful, about
the winter solstice along with the early
flowers and blossoms</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>,
65).</note>
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The body
of Osiris
floats to
Byblus,
where it is
recovered
by Isis. The
body of
Osiris dismembered
by Typhon,
and the
pieces
recovered
by Isis.
Diodorus
Siculus on
the burial
of Osiris.</note>
Meantime the coffer containing the body of Osiris had
floated down the river and away out to sea, till at last it
drifted ashore at Byblus, on the coast of Syria. Here a fine
<foreign rend='italic'>erica</foreign>-tree shot up suddenly and enclosed the chest in its
trunk. The king of the country, admiring the growth of
the tree, had it cut down and made into a pillar of his
house; but he did not know that the coffer with the dead
Osiris was in it. Word of this came to Isis and she
journeyed to Byblus, and sat down by the well, in humble
guise, her face wet with tears. To none would she speak
till the king's handmaidens came, and them she greeted
kindly, and braided their hair, and breathed on them from
her own divine body a wondrous perfume. But when the
queen beheld the braids of her handmaidens' hair and smelt
the sweet smell that emanated from them, she sent for the
stranger woman and took her into her house and made her
the nurse of her child. But Isis gave the babe her finger
instead of her breast to suck, and at night she began to burn
all that was mortal of him away, while she herself in the
likeness of a swallow fluttered round the pillar that contained
her dead brother, twittering mournfully. But the
queen spied what she was doing and shrieked out when she
saw her child in flames, and thereby she hindered him from
becoming immortal. Then the goddess revealed herself
and begged for the pillar of the roof, and they gave it her,
and she cut the coffer out of it, and fell upon it and embraced
it and lamented so loud that the younger of the king's
children died of fright on the spot. But the trunk of the tree
she wrapped in fine linen, and poured ointment on it, and gave
it to the king and queen, and the wood stands in a temple of
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
Isis and is worshipped by the people of Byblus to this day.
And Isis put the coffer in a boat and took the eldest of
the king's children with her and sailed away. As soon as
they were alone, she opened the chest, and laying her face
on the face of her brother she kissed him and wept. But the
child came behind her softly and saw what she was about,
and she turned and looked at him in anger, and the child
could not bear her look and died; but some say that it was
not so, but that he fell into the sea and was drowned. It is
he whom the Egyptians sing of at their banquets under the
name of Maneros. But Isis put the coffer by and went to
see her son Horus at the city of Buto, and Typhon found
the coffer as he was hunting a boar one night by the light of a
full moon.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 8, 18.</note> And he knew the body, and rent it into fourteen
pieces, and scattered them abroad. But Isis sailed up and
down the marshes in a shallop made of papyrus, looking for
the pieces; and that is why when people sail in shallops
made of papyrus, the crocodiles do not hurt them, for they
fear or respect the goddess. And that is the reason, too,
why there are many graves of Osiris in Egypt, for she buried
each limb as she found it. But others will have it that she
buried an image of him in every city, pretending it was his
body, in order that Osiris might be worshipped in many
places, and that if Typhon searched for the real grave he
might not be able to find it.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 18.</note> However, the genital member
of Osiris had been eaten by the fishes, so Isis made an image
of it instead, and the image is used by the Egyptians
at their festivals to this day.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 18. Compare
Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refutatio omnium
haeresium</hi>, v. 7, p. 142, ed. L. Duncker
and F. G. Schneidewin (Göttingen,
1859).</note> <q>Isis,</q> writes the historian
Diodorus Siculus, <q>recovered all the parts of the body except
the genitals; and because she wished that her husband's
grave should be unknown and honoured by all who dwell in
the land of Egypt, she resorted to the following device.
She moulded human images out of wax and spices, corresponding
to the stature of Osiris, round each one of
the parts of his body. Then she called in the priests
according to their families and took an oath of them all that
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
they would reveal to no man the trust she was about to repose
in them. So to each of them privately she said that
to them alone she entrusted the burial of the body, and reminding
them of the benefits they had received she exhorted
them to bury the body in their own land and to honour
Osiris as a god. She also besought them to dedicate one of
the animals of their country, whichever they chose, and to
honour it in life as they had formerly honoured Osiris, and
when it died to grant it obsequies like his. And because she
would encourage the priests in their own interest to bestow
the aforesaid honours, she gave them a third part of the land
to be used by them in the service and worship of the gods.
Accordingly it is said that the priests, mindful of the benefits
of Osiris, desirous of gratifying the queen, and moved by the
prospect of gain, carried out all the injunctions of Isis.
Wherefore to this day each of the priests imagines that
Osiris is buried in his country, and they honour the beasts
that were consecrated in the beginning, and when the
animals die the priests renew at their burial the mourning
for Osiris. But the sacred bulls, the one called Apis and
the other Mnevis, were dedicated to Osiris, and it was
ordained that they should be worshipped as gods in common
by all the Egyptians; since these animals above all others
had helped the discoverers of corn in sowing the seed
and procuring the universal benefits of agriculture.</q><note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 21. 5-11;
compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, iv. 6. 3; Strabo, xvii. 1.
23, p. 803.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
various
members
of Osiris
treasured
as relics in
various
parts of
Egypt.</note>
Such is the myth or legend of Osiris, as told by Greek
writers and eked out by more or less fragmentary notices or
allusions in native Egyptian literature. A long inscription
in the temple at Denderah has preserved a list of the god's
graves, and other texts mention the parts of his body which
were treasured as holy relics in each of the sanctuaries.
Thus his heart was at Athribis, his backbone at Busiris, his
neck at Letopolis, and his head at Memphis. As often
happens in such cases, some of his divine limbs were miraculously
multiplied. His head, for example, was at Abydos as
well as at Memphis, and his legs, which were remarkably
numerous, would have sufficed for several ordinary mortals.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <q>Das Osiris-Mysterium
von Tentyra,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
ägyptische Sprache und Alterthumskunde</hi>,
xix. (1881) pp. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; V.
Loret, <q>Les fêtes d'Osiris au mois de
Khoiak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux relatifs
à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie
Égyptiennes et Assyriennes</hi>, iii. (1882)
pp. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario
di Mitologia Egizia</hi>, pp. 697
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites
Buch</hi> (Leipsic, 1890), pp. 584 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten Ägypter</hi>,
p. 115; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi>, pp. 215 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben im
Altertum</hi>, pp. 367 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
In this respect, however, Osiris was nothing to St. Denys,
of whom no less than seven heads, all equally genuine, are
extant.<note place='foot'>J. Rendel Harris, <hi rend='italic'>The Annotators
of the Codex Bezae</hi> (London, 1901), p.
104, note 2, referring to Dulaure.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris
mourned
by Isis and
Nephthys.</note>
According to native Egyptian accounts, which supplement
that of Plutarch, when Isis had found the corpse of
her husband Osiris, she and her sister Nephthys sat down
beside it and uttered a lament which in after ages became
the type of all Egyptian lamentations for the dead. <q>Come
to thy house,</q> they wailed, <q>Come to thy house. O god
On! come to thy house, thou who hast no foes. O fair
youth, come to thy house, that thou mayest see me. I am
thy sister, whom thou lovest; thou shalt not part from me.
O fair boy, come to thy house.... I see thee not, yet doth
my heart yearn after thee and mine eyes desire thee. Come
to her who loves thee, who loves thee, Unnefer, thou blessed
one! Come to thy sister, come to thy wife, to thy wife,
thou whose heart stands still. Come to thy housewife. I
am thy sister by the same mother, thou shalt not be far from
me. Gods and men have turned their faces towards thee
and weep for thee together.... I call after thee and weep,
so that my cry is heard to heaven, but thou hearest not my
voice; yet am I thy sister, whom thou didst love on earth;
thou didst love none but me, my brother! my brother!</q><note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Berlin, 1909), pp. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E.
A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, ii. 59 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
This lament for the fair youth cut off in his prime reminds
us of the laments for Adonis. The title of Unnefer or <q>the
Good Being</q> bestowed on him marks the beneficence which
tradition universally ascribed to Osiris; it was at once his
commonest title and one of his names as king.<note place='foot'>A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, p. 211.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Being
brought
to life
again,
Osiris
reigns as
king and
judge of
the dead
in the other
world.
The confession
of
the dead.</note>
The lamentations of the two sad sisters were not in
vain. In pity for her sorrow the sun-god Ra sent down
from heaven the jackal-headed god Anubis, who, with the
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
aid of Isis and Nephthys, of Thoth and Horus, pieced
together the broken body of the murdered god, swathed it
in linen bandages, and observed all the other rites which
the Egyptians were wont to perform over the bodies of the
departed. Then Isis fanned the cold clay with her wings:
Osiris revived, and thenceforth reigned as king over the
dead in the other world.<note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient
Classique</hi>, i. 176; E. A. Wallis
Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>, ii.
140, 262; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, i. 70-75, 80-82. On
Osiris as king of the dead see Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 79.</note> There he bore the titles of Lord
of the Underworld, Lord of Eternity, Ruler of the Dead.<note place='foot'>Miss Margaret A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The
Osireion at Abydos</hi> (London, 1904),
pp. 8, 17, 18.</note>
There, too, in the great Hall of the Two Truths, assisted by
forty-two assessors, one from each of the principal districts of
Egypt, he presided as judge at the trial of the souls of the
departed, who made their solemn confession before him, and,
their heart having been weighed in the balance of justice, received
the reward of virtue in a life eternal or the appropriate
punishment of their sins.<note place='foot'>On Osiris as judge of the dead
see A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der
alten Ägypter</hi>, pp. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>,
pp. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient
Classique</hi>, i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. A. Wallis
Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Book of the Dead</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1909), i. pp. liii. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of
the Egyptians</hi>, ii. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris
and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 305
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The confession or rather profession
which the <hi rend='italic'>Book of the Dead</hi> puts in the mouth of the deceased
at the judgment-bar of Osiris<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Book of the Dead</hi>, ch. cxxv.
(vol. ii. pp. 355 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> of Budge's
translation; P. Pierret, <hi rend='italic'>Le Livre des
Morts</hi>, Paris, 1882, pp. 369 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>);
R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di Mitologia
Egizia</hi>, pp. 788 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten Ägypter</hi>, pp.
132-134; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi>, pp. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Maspero,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient
Classique</hi>, i. 188-191; A. Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 117-121;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J.
H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>Development of Religion
and Thought in Ancient Egypt</hi>, pp.
297 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> sets the morality of the
ancient Egyptians in a very favourable light. In rendering
an account of his life the deceased solemnly protested that he
had not oppressed his fellow-men, that he had made none
to weep, that he had done no murder, neither committed
fornication nor borne false witness, that he had not falsified
the balance, that he had not taken the milk from the mouths
of babes, that he had given bread to the hungry and water
to the thirsty, and had clothed the naked. In harmony
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
with these professions are the epitaphs on Egyptian graves,
which reveal, if not the moral practice, at least the moral
ideals of those who slept beneath them. Thus, for example,
a man says in his epitaph: <q>I gave bread to the hungry
and clothes to the naked, and ferried across in my own boat
him who could not pass the water. I was a father to the
orphan, a husband to the widow, a shelter from the wind to
them that were cold. I am one that spake good and told
good. I earned my substance in righteousness.</q><note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 121. Compare A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Religion der alten Ägypter</hi>, pp. 134
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi>, p. 253.</note> Those
who had done thus in their mortal life and had been acquitted
at the Great Assize, were believed to dwell thenceforth at
ease in a land where the corn grew higher than on earth,
where harvests never failed, where trees were always green,
and wives for ever young and fair.<note place='foot'>A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, p. 254; E. A.
Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, i. 305 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Maspero,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die
ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E.
A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 100
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Lefébure, <q>Le Paradis
Egyptien,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sphinx</hi>, iii. (Upsala, 1900)
pp. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The fate of
the wicked.</note>
We are not clearly informed as to the fate which the
Egyptians supposed to befall the wicked after death. In
the scenes which represent the Last Judgment there is seen
crouching beside the scales, in which the heart of the
dead is being weighed, a monstrous animal known as the
<q>Eater of the Dead.</q> It has the head of a crocodile, the
trunk of a lion, and the hinder parts of a hippopotamus.
Some think that the souls of those whose hearts had been
weighed in the balance and found wanting were delivered
over to this grim monster to be devoured; but this view
appears to be conjectural. <q>Generally the animal seems
to have been placed there simply as guardian of the entrance
to the Fields of the Blessed, but sometimes it is likened to
Set. Elsewhere it is said that the judges of the dead slay
the wicked and drink their blood. In brief, here also we have
conflicting statements, and can only gather that there seems to
have been no general agreement among the dwellers in the
Valley of the Nile as to the ultimate lot of the wicked.</q><note place='foot'>A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, p. 249. Compare
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 117, 121; E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>,
i. 317, 328.</note>
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In the
resurrection
of
Osiris the
Egyptians
saw a
pledge
of their
own immortality.</note>
In the resurrection of Osiris the Egyptians saw the
pledge of a life everlasting for themselves beyond the grave.
They believed that every man would live eternally in the
other world if only his surviving friends did for his body
what the gods had done for the body of Osiris. Hence the
ceremonies observed by the Egyptians over the human
dead were an exact copy of those which Anubis, Horus,
and the rest had performed over the dead god. <q>At
every burial there was enacted a representation of the
divine mystery which had been performed of old over
Osiris, when his son, his sisters, his friends were gathered
round his mangled remains and succeeded by their spells
and manipulations in converting his broken body into
the first mummy, which they afterwards reanimated and
furnished with the means of entering on a new individual
life beyond the grave. The mummy of the deceased was
Osiris; the professional female mourners were his two sisters
Isis and Nephthys; Anubis, Horus, all the gods of the
Osirian legend gathered about the corpse.</q> In this solemn
drama of death and resurrection the principal part was
played by the celebrant, who represented Horus the son of
the dead and resuscitated Osiris.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <q>Le rituel du sacrifice
funéraire,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie
et d'Archéologie Égyptiennes</hi> (Paris,
1893-1912), i. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> He formally opened the
eyes and mouth of the dead man by rubbing or pretending
to rub them four times with the bleeding heart and thigh
of a sacrificed bull; after which a pretence was made of
actually opening the mouth of the mummy or of the statue
with certain instruments specially reserved for the purpose.
Geese and gazelles were also sacrificed by being decapitated;
they were supposed to represent the enemies of Osiris, who
after the murder of the divine man had sought to evade the
righteous punishment of their crime but had been detected
and beheaded.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 300-316.
Compare A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion
der alten Ägypter</hi>, pp. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>,
pp. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>The Book of the Dead</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1909),
i. pp. iiii. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the
Egyptians</hi>, ii. 126, 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris
and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 66
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 176, 305, 399 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A.
Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Du Caractère religieux de la
Royauté Pharaonique</hi> (Paris, 1902),
p. 312; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kings and Gods of Egypt</hi>
(New York and London, 1912), pp.
91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mystères Égyptiens</hi> (Paris,
1913), pp. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> <q>In one of the
ceremonies of the <q>Opening of the
Mouth</q> the deceased was temporarily
placed in a bull's skin, which was
probably that of one of the bulls which
were offered up during the celebration
of the service. From this skin the
deceased obtained further power, and
his emergence from it was the visible
symbol of his resurrection and of his
entrance into everlasting life with all
the strength of Osiris and Horus</q>
(E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 400).</note>
</p>

<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Every dead
Egyptian
identified
with Osiris.</note>
Thus every dead Egyptian was identified with Osiris and
bore his name. From the Middle Kingdom onwards it was
the regular practice to address the deceased as <q>Osiris So-and-So,</q>
as if he were the god himself, and to add the
standing epithet <q>true of speech,</q> because true speech was
characteristic of Osiris.<note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, p. 416; J.
H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi>, pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Margaret A.
Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The Osireion at Abydos</hi> (London,
1904), p. 31. Under the earlier
dynasties only kings appear to have
been identified with Osiris.</note> The thousands of inscribed and
pictured tombs that have been opened in the valley of the
Nile prove that the mystery of the resurrection was performed
for the benefit of every dead Egyptian;<note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Mystères Égyptiens</hi>
(Paris, 1913), p. 40.</note> as Osiris died and
rose again from the dead, so all men hoped to arise like him
from death to life eternal. In an Egyptian text it is said of
the departed that <q>as surely as Osiris lives, so shall he live
also; as surely as Osiris did not die, so shall he not die; as surely
as Osiris is not annihilated, so shall he too not be annihilated.</q>
The dead man, conceived to be lying, like Osiris, with
mangled body, was comforted by being told that the heavenly
goddess Nut, the mother of Osiris, was coming to gather up
his poor scattered limbs and mould them with her own hands
into a form immortal and divine. <q>She gives thee thy
head, she brings thee thy bones, she sets thy limbs together
and puts thy heart in thy body.</q> Thus the resurrection of
the dead was conceived, like that of Osiris, not merely as
spiritual but also as bodily. <q>They possess their heart, they
possess their senses, they possess their mouth, they possess
their feet, they possess their arms, they possess all their
limbs.</q><note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 111-113. However, in
later times the body with which the
dead came to life was believed to be a
spiritual, not a material body; it was
called <foreign rend='italic'>sāhu</foreign>. See E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>The Book of the Dead</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. pp. lvii. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>,
ii. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Combat
between
Set and
Horus, the
brother
and the son
of Osiris,
for the
crown of
Egypt.</note>
If we may trust Egyptian legend, the trials and contests
of the royal house did not cease with the restoration of Osiris
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
to life and his elevation to the rank of presiding deity in the
world of the dead. When Horus the younger, the son of
Osiris and Isis, was grown to man's estate, the ghost of his
royal and murdered father appeared to him and urged him,
like another Hamlet, to avenge the foul unnatural murder
upon his wicked uncle. Thus encouraged, the youth attacked
the miscreant. The combat was terrific and lasted many
days. Horus lost an eye in the conflict and Set suffered a
still more serious mutilation. At last Thoth parted the
combatants and healed their wounds; the eye of Horus he
restored by spitting on it. According to one account the
great battle was fought on the twenty-sixth day of the month
of Thoth. Foiled in open war, the artful uncle now took
the law of his virtuous nephew. He brought a suit of
bastardy against Horus, hoping thus to rob him of his
inheritance and to get possession of it himself; nay, not
content with having murdered his good brother, the unnatural
Set carried his rancour even beyond the grave by accusing
the dead Osiris of certain high crimes and misdemeanours.
The case was tried before the supreme court of the gods in
the great hall at Heliopolis. Thoth, the god of wisdom,
pleaded the cause of Osiris, and the august judges decided
that <q>the word of Osiris was true.</q> Moreover, they pronounced
Horus to be the true-begotten son of his father.
So that prince assumed the crown and mounted the throne
of the lamented Osiris. However, according to another and
perhaps later version of the story, the victory of Horus over
his uncle was by no means so decisive, and their struggles
ended in a compromise, by which Horus reigned over the
Delta, while Set became king of the upper valley of the Nile
from near Memphis to the first cataract. Be that as it may,
with the accession of Horus began for the Egyptians the
modern period of the world, for on his throne all the kings
of Egypt sat as his successors.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 19 and 55;
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, p. 368; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die
ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A.
Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten
Ägypter</hi>, p. 114; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, pp. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G.
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples
de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 176-178;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 64,
89 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 309 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The legend
of their
contest
may be a
reminiscence
of
dynastic
struggles.</note>
These legends of a contest for the throne of Egypt
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
may perhaps contain a reminiscence of real dynastical
struggles which attended an attempt to change the right of
succession from the female to the male line. For under a
rule of female kinship the heir to the throne is either the
late king's brother, or the son of the late king's sister, while
under a rule of male kinship the heir to the throne is the
late king's son. In the legend of Osiris the rival heirs are
Set and Horus, Set being the late king's brother, and Horus
the late king's son; though Horus indeed united both claims
to the crown, being the son of the king's sister as well as of
the king. A similar attempt to shift the line of succession
seems to have given rise to similar contests at Rome.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris represented
as a king in
tradition
and art.
The tomb
of Osiris at
Abydos.</note>
Thus according to what seems to have been the
general native tradition Osiris was a good and beloved
king of Egypt, who suffered a violent death but rose from
the dead and was henceforth worshipped as a deity. In
harmony with this tradition he was regularly represented
by sculptors and painters in human and regal form as a
dead king, swathed in the wrappings of a mummy, but
wearing on his head a kingly crown and grasping in one
of his hands, which were left free from the bandages, a
kingly sceptre.<note place='foot'>A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, p. 217. For
details see E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris
and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i.
30 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Two cities above all others were associated
with his myth or memory. One of them was Busiris in
Lower Egypt, which claimed to possess his backbone; the
other was Abydos in Upper Egypt, which gloried in
the possession of his head.<note place='foot'>J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London, 1908), p.
61; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Development of Religion and
Thought in Ancient Egypt</hi>, p. 38;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 37, 67,
81, 210, 212, 214, 290, ii. 1, 2, 8-13,
82-85; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 21, 23, 110; A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>,
p. 289; Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des
Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. pp. 70, 96, 97. It
appears to be now generally held that
the original seat of the worship of
Osiris was at Busiris, but that at Abydos
the god found a second home, which in
time eclipsed the old one in glory.
According to Professors Ed. Meyer
and A. Erman, the god whom Osiris
displaced at Abydos was Anubis.</note> Encircled by the nimbus of
the dead yet living god, Abydos, originally an obscure
place, became from the end of the Old Kingdom the
holiest spot in Egypt; his tomb there would seem to have
been to the Egyptians what the Church of the Holy
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
Sepulchre at Jerusalem is to Christians. It was the wish
of every pious man that his dead body should rest in
hallowed earth near the grave of the glorified Osiris. Few
indeed were rich enough to enjoy this inestimable privilege;
for, apart from the cost of a tomb in the sacred city, the
mere transport of mummies from great distances was both
difficult and expensive. Yet so eager were many to absorb
in death the blessed influence which radiated from the holy
sepulchre that they caused their surviving friends to convey
their mortal remains to Abydos, there to tarry for a short
time, and then to be brought back by river and interred in
the tombs which had been made ready for them in their
native land. Others had cenotaphs built or memorial
tablets erected for themselves near the tomb of their dead
and risen Lord, that they might share with him the bliss of
a joyful resurrection.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 20; A.
Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben
im Altertum</hi>, p. 417; J. H. Breasted,
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1908), pp. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ed.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i.
2. p. 209; E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris
and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 68
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The tombs
of the old
kings at
Abydos.
The tomb
of King
Khent
identified
with the
tomb of
Osiris.
The sculptured
effigy
of Osiris. The hawk
the crest of
the earliest
dynasties.</note>
Hence from the earliest ages of Egyptian history Abydos
would seem to have been a city of the dead rather than of
the living; certainly there is no evidence that the place
was ever of any political importance.<note place='foot'>Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2. p. 125.</note> No less than nine of
the most ancient kings of Egypt known to us were buried
here, for their tombs have been discovered and explored
within recent years.<note place='foot'>J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, pp. 43, 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
The excavations were begun by E.
Amélineau and continued by W. M.
Flinders Petrie (Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. p. 119). See
E. Amélineau, <hi rend='italic'>Le Tombeau d'Osiris</hi>
(Paris, 1899); W. M. Flinders Petrie,
<hi rend='italic'>The Royal Tombs of the Earliest
Dynasties</hi>, Part ii. (London, 1901).
The excavations of the former have
been criticized by Sir Gaston Maspero
(<hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et d'Archéologie
Égyptiennes</hi>, vi. (Paris, 1912) pp.
153-182).</note> The royal necropolis lies on the edge
of the desert about a mile and a half from the temple of
Osiris.<note place='foot'>Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2. pp. 119, 124; E. A.
Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, ii. 8. The place is now
known by the Arabic name of Umm
al-Ka'âb or <q>Mother of Pots</q> on
account of the large quantity of pottery
that has been found there.</note> Of the graves the oldest is that of King Khent,
the second or third king of the first dynasty. His reign,
which fell somewhere between three thousand four hundred
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
and three thousand two hundred years before our era,
seems to have marked an epoch in the history of Egypt,
for under him the costume, the figure drawing, and the
hieroglyphics all assumed the character which they thenceforth
preserved to the very end of Egyptian nationality.<note place='foot'>Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2. pp. 119, 125, 127, 128,
129, 209. The king's Horus name has
sometimes been read Zer, but according
to Professor Meyer (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 128) and
Dr. Budge (<hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, ii. 83) the true reading is
Khent (Chent). The king's personal
name was perhaps Ka (Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 128).</note>
Later ages identified him with Osiris in a more intimate
sense than that in which the divine title was lavished
on every dead king and indeed on every dead man; for
his tomb was actually converted into the tomb of Osiris
and as such received in great profusion the offerings of the
faithful. Somewhere between the twenty-second and the
twenty-sixth dynasty a massive bier of grey granite was
placed in the sepulchral chamber. On it, cut in high relief,
reposes a shrouded figure of the dead Osiris. He lies at
full length, with bare and upturned face. On his head is
the White Crown of Upper Egypt; in his hands, which
issue from the shroud, he holds the characteristic emblems
of the god, the sceptre and the scourge. At the four corners
of the bier are perched four hawks, representing the four
children of Horus, each with their father's banner, keeping
watch over the dead god, as they kept watch over the four
quarters of the world. A fifth hawk seems to have been
perched on the middle of the body of Osiris, but it had been
broken off before the tomb was discovered in recent years, for
only the bird's claws remain in position. Finely carved heads
of lions, one at each corner of the bier, with the claws to
match below, complete the impressive monument. The
scene represented is unquestionably the impregnation of Isis
in the form of a hawk by the dead Osiris; the Copts who
dismantled the shrine appear to have vented their pious
rage on the figure of the hawk Isis by carrying it off or
smashing it. If any doubt could exist as to the meaning
of these sculptured figures, it would be set at rest by the
ancient inscriptions attached to them. Over against the
right shoulder of the shrouded figure, who lies stretched on
the bier, are carved in hieroglyphics the words, <q>Osiris, the
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
Good Being, true of speech</q>; and over against the place
where the missing hawk perched on the body of the dead
god is carved the symbol of Isis. Two relics of the ancient
human occupants of the tomb escaped alike the fury of the
fanatics and the avarice of the plunderers who pillaged and
destroyed it. One of the relics is a human skull, from
which the lower jawbone is missing; the other is an arm
encircled by gorgeous jewelled bracelets of gold, turquoises,
amethysts, and dark purple lapis lazuli. The former may
be the head of King Khent himself; the latter is almost
certainly the arm of his queen. One of the bracelets is
composed of alternate plaques of gold and turquoise, each
ornamented with the figure of a hawk perched on the
top of it.<note place='foot'>E. Amélineau, <hi rend='italic'>Le Tombeau d'Osiris</hi>
(Paris, 1899), pp. 107-115; W. M.
Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>The Royal Tombs of
the Earliest Dynasties</hi>, Part ii. (London,
1901) pp. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 16-19, with
the frontispiece and plates lx. lxi.;
G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Études de Mythologie et
d'Archéologie Égyptiennes</hi> (Paris, 1893-1912),
vi. 167-173; J. H. Breasted,
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1908), pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 148;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, ii. 8-10, 13,
83-85. The tomb, with its interesting
contents, was discovered and excavated
by Monsieur E. Amélineau.
The masses, almost the mountains,
of broken pottery, under which the
tomb was found to be buried, are
probably remains of the vessels in
which pious pilgrims presented their
offerings at the shrine. See E. Amélineau,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. H.
Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 51, 148. The
high White Crown, worn by Osiris,
was the symbol of the king's dominion
over Upper Egypt; the flat Red
Crown, with a high backpiece and a
projecting spiral, was the symbol of
his dominion over Lower Egypt. On
the monuments the king is sometimes
represented wearing a combination of
the White and the Red Crown to
symbolize his sovereignty over both
the South and the North. White was
the distinctive colour of Upper, as red
was of Lower, Egypt. The treasury
of Upper Egypt was called <q>the
White House</q>; the treasury of Lower
Egypt was called <q>the Red House.</q>
See Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2. pp. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. H.
Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi> (London, 1908), pp. 34 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
36, 41.</note> The hawk was the sacred bird or crest of
the earliest dynasties of Egyptian kings. The figure of a
hawk was borne before the king as a standard on solemn
occasions: the oldest capital of the country known to us
was called Hawk-town: there the kings of the first dynasty
built a temple to the hawk: there in modern times has
been found a splendid golden head of a hawk dating from
the Ancient Empire; and on the life-like statue of King
Chephren of the third dynasty we see a hawk with out-spread
wings protecting the back of the monarch's head.
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
From the earliest to the latest times of Egyptian civilization
<q>the Hawk</q> was the epithet of the king of Egypt
and of the king alone; it took the first place in the list of
his titles.<note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Mystères Égyptiens</hi>
(Paris, 1913), pp. 159-162, with
plate iii. Compare Victor Loret,
<q>L'Égypte au temps du totémisme,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Conférences faites au Musée Guimet,
Bibliothèque de Vulgarisation</hi>, xix.
(Paris, 1906) pp. 179-186. Both
these writers regard the hawk as the
totem of the royal clan. This view is
rejected by Prof. Ed. Meyer, who,
however, holds that Horus, whose
emblem was the hawk, was the oldest
national god of Egypt (<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des
Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. pp. 102-106). He
prefers to suppose that the hawk, or
rather the falcon, was the emblem of a
god of light because the bird flies high
in the sky (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 73; according
to him the bird is not the sparrow-hawk
but the falcon, ib. p. 75). A
similar view is adopted by Professor
A. Wiedemann (<hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, p. 26). Compare
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 10, 11. The native Egyptian
name of Hawk-town was Nechen, in
Greek it was Hieraconpolis (Ed. Meyer,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 103). Hawks were worshipped
by the inhabitants (Strabo,
xvii. 1. 47, p. 817).</note> The sanctity of the bird may help us to understand
why Isis took the form of a hawk in order to mate
with her dead husband; why the queen of Egypt wore on
her arm a bracelet adorned with golden hawks; and why in
the holy sepulchre the four sons of Horus were represented
in the likeness of hawks keeping watch over the effigy of
their divine grandfather.<note place='foot'>According to the legend the four
sons of Horus were set by Anubis to
protect the burial of Osiris. They
washed his dead body, they mourned
over him, and they opened his cold
lips with their fingers. But they disappeared,
for Isis had caused them to
grow out of a lotus flower in a pool of
water. In that position they are sometimes
represented in Egyptian art
before the seated effigy of Osiris. See
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 43; E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris
and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 40,
41, 327.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The association
of
Osiris with
Byblus.</note>
The legend recorded by Plutarch which associated the
dead Osiris with Byblus in Phoenicia<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> is doubtless late and
probably untrustworthy. It may have been suggested by
the resemblance which the worship of the Egyptian Osiris
bore to the worship of the Phoenician Adonis in that city.
But it is possible that the story has no deeper foundation
than a verbal misunderstanding. For Byblus is not only
the name of a city, it is the Greek word for papyrus; and
as Isis is said after the death of Osiris to have taken refuge
in the papyrus swamps of the Delta, where she gave birth to
and reared her son Horus, a Greek writer may perhaps have
confused the plant with the city of the same name.<note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> However
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
that may have been, the association of Osiris with
Adonis at Byblus gave rise to a curious tale. It is said
that every year the people beyond the rivers of Ethiopia
used to write a letter to the women of Byblus informing
them that the lost and lamented Adonis was found. This
letter they enclosed in an earthen pot, which they sealed
and sent floating down the river to the sea. The waves
carried the pot to Byblus, where every year it arrived at
the time when the Syrian women were weeping for their
dead Lord. The pot was taken up from the water and
opened: the letter was read; and the weeping women
dried their tears, because the lost Adonis was found.<note place='foot'>Cyril of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>In Isaiam</hi>, lib. ii. Tomus iii. (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia
Graeca</hi>, lxx. 441).</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Official Egyptian Calendar.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The date
of a
festival
sometimes
furnishes
a clue to
the nature
of the god.</note>
A useful clue to the original nature of a god or goddess is
often furnished by the season at which his or her festival is
celebrated. Thus, if the festival falls at the new or the full
moon, there is a certain presumption that the deity thus
honoured either is the moon or at least has lunar affinities.
If the festival is held at the winter or summer solstice, we
naturally surmise that the god is the sun, or at all events
that he stands in some close relation to that luminary.
Again, if the festival coincides with the time of sowing or
harvest, we are inclined to infer that the divinity is an
embodiment of the earth or of the corn. These presumptions
or inferences, taken by themselves, are by no means conclusive;
but if they happen to be confirmed by other
indications, the evidence may be regarded as fairly strong.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The year
of the
Egyptian
calendar
a vague or
movable
one.</note>
Unfortunately, in dealing with the Egyptian gods we are
in a great measure precluded from making use of this clue.
The reason is not that the dates of the festivals are always
unknown, but that they shifted from year to year, until
after a long interval they had revolved through the whole
course of the seasons. This gradual revolution of the
festal Egyptian cycle resulted from the employment of a
calendar year which neither corresponded exactly to the
solar year nor was periodically corrected by intercalation.<note place='foot'>As to the Egyptian calendar see
L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>
(Berlin, 1825-1826), i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Sir
J. G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London,
1878), ii. 368 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Chronologie der Aegypter</hi>, i. (Berlin,
1849) pp. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Brugsch,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Ägyptologie</hi> (Leipsic, 1891), pp.
347-366; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und
aegyptisches Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp.
468 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne
des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 207-210; Ed. Meyer,
<q>Aegyptische Chronologie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen
der königl. Preuss. Akademie
der Wissenschaften</hi>, 1904, pp. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Nachträge zur ägyptischen
Chronologie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der
königl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften</hi>,
1907, pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. pp.
28 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 98 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. K. Ginzel,
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen und
technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. (Leipsic,
1906) pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
The solar year is equivalent to about three hundred and sixty-five
and a quarter days; but the ancient Egyptians, ignoring
the quarter of a day, reckoned the year at three hundred and
sixty-five days only.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 4, with A. Wiedemann's
note; Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa
Astronomiae</hi>, 8, p. 106, ed. C. Manitius
(Leipsic, 1898); Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De
die natali</hi>, xviii. 10.</note> Thus each of their calendar years
was shorter than the true solar year by about a quarter of a
day. In four years the deficiency amounted to one whole
day; in forty years it amounted to ten days; in four hundred
years it amounted to a hundred days; and so it went on
increasing until after a lapse of four times three hundred and
sixty-five, or one thousand four hundred and sixty solar
years, the deficiency amounted to three hundred and sixty-five
days, or a whole Egyptian year. Hence one thousand
four hundred and sixty solar years, or their equivalent,
one thousand four hundred and sixty-one Egyptian years,
formed a period or cycle at the end of which the Egyptian
festivals returned to those points of the solar year at which
they had been celebrated in the beginning.<note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>,
8, pp. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ed. C. Manitius.</note> In the meantime
they had been held successively on every day of the
solar year, though always on the same day of the calendar.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus the
official
calendar
was
divorced
from the
natural
calendar,
which is
marked by
the course
of the
seasons.</note>
Thus the official calendar was completely divorced,
except at rare and long intervals, from what may be called
the natural calendar of the shepherd, the husbandman, and
the sailor&mdash;that is, from the course of the seasons in which
the times for the various labours of cattle-breeding, tillage,
and navigation are marked by the position of the sun in the
sky, the rising or setting of the stars, the fall of rain, the
growth of pasture, the ripening of the corn, the blowing of
certain winds, and so forth. Nowhere, perhaps, are the
events of this natural calendar better marked or more
regular in their recurrence than in Egypt; nowhere accordingly
could their divergence from the corresponding dates
of the official calendar be more readily observed. The
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
divergence certainly did not escape the notice of the
Egyptians themselves, and some of them apparently
attempted successfully to correct it. Thus we are told that
the Theban priests, who particularly excelled in astronomy,
were acquainted with the true length of the solar year, and
harmonized the calendar with it by intercalating a day
every few, probably every four, years.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 50. 2; Strabo,
xvii. i. 46, p. 816. According to H.
Brugsch (<hi rend='italic'>Die Ägyptologie</hi>, pp. 349
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), the Egyptians would seem to have
denoted the movable year of the
calendar and the fixed year of the sun
by different written symbols. For more
evidence that they were acquainted
with a four years' period, corrected by
intercalation, see R. Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>Chronologie
der Aegypter</hi>, i. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> But this scientific
improvement was too deeply opposed to the religious conservatism
of the Egyptian nature to win general acceptance.
<q>The Egyptians,</q> said Geminus, a Greek astronomer writing
about 77 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, <q>are of an opposite opinion and purpose from
the Greeks. For they neither reckon the years by the sun
nor the months and days by the moon, but they observe a
peculiar system of their own. They wish, in fact, that the
sacrifices should not always be offered to the gods at the
same time of the year, but that they should pass through
all the seasons of the year, so that the summer festival should
in time be celebrated in winter, in autumn, and in spring.
For that purpose they employ a year of three hundred and
sixty-five days, composed of twelve months of thirty days
each, with five supplementary days added. But they do
not add the quarter of a day for the reason I have given&mdash;namely,
in order that their festivals may revolve.</q><note place='foot'>Geminus, <hi rend='italic'>Elementa Astronomiae</hi>,
8, p. 106, ed. C. Manitius. The same
writer further (p. 108) describes as a
popular Greek error the opinion that
the Egyptian festival of Isis coincided
with the winter solstice. In his day,
he tells us, the two events were
separated by an interval of a full month,
though they had coincided a hundred
and twenty years before the time he
was writing.</note> So
attached, indeed, were the Egyptians to their old calendar,
that the kings at their consecration were led by the priest
of Isis at Memphis into the holy of holies, and there made
to swear that they would maintain the year of three hundred
and sixty-five days without intercalation.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scholia in Caesaris Germanici
Aratea</hi>, p. 409, ed. Fr. Eyssenhardt,
in his edition of Martianus Capella
(Leipsic, 1866).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attempt of
Ptolemy
III. to
reform the
Egyptian
calendar
by intercalation.</note>
The practical inconvenience of a calendar which marked
true time only once in about fifteen hundred years might be
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
calmly borne by a submissive Oriental race like the ancient
Egyptians, but it naturally proved a stumbling-block to the
less patient temperament of their European conquerors.
Accordingly in the reign of King Ptolemy III. Euergetes a
decree was passed that henceforth the movable Egyptian
year should be converted into a fixed solar year by the
intercalation of one day at the end of every four years, <q>in
order that the seasons may do their duty perpetually
according to the present constitution of the world, and that
it may not happen, through the shifting of the star by one
day in four years, that some of the public festivals which
are now held in the winter should ever be celebrated in the
summer, and that other festivals now held in the summer
should hereafter be celebrated in the winter, as has happened
before, and must happen again if the year of three hundred and
sixty-five days be retained.</q> The decree was passed in the
year 239 or 238 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> by the high priests, scribes, and other
dignitaries of the Egyptian church assembled in convocation
at Canopus; but we cannot doubt that the measure, though
it embodied native Egyptian science, was prompted by the
king or his Macedonian advisers.<note place='foot'>Copies of the decree in hieroglyphic,
demotic, and Greek have been
found inscribed on stones in Egypt.
See Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi> (Brussels, 1900), pp. 415 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
No. 551; W. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Orientis
Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</hi> (Leipsic,
1903-1905), vol. i. pp. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No.
56; J. P. Mahaffy, <hi rend='italic'>The Empire of the
Ptolemies</hi> (London, 1895), pp. 205
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 226 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The star mentioned in
the decree is the Dog-star (Sirius).
See below, pp. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> This sage attempt to
reform the erratic calendar was not permanently successful.
The change may indeed have been carried out during the
reign of the king who instituted it, but it was abandoned by
the year 196 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> at latest, as we learn from the celebrated
inscription known as the Rosetta stone, in which a month
of the Macedonian calendar is equated to the corresponding
month of the movable Egyptian year.<note place='foot'>W. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Orientis Graeci
Inscriptiones Selectae</hi>, vol. i. pp. 140
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No. 90, with note 25 of the
editor.</note> And the testimony
of Geminus, which I have cited, proves that in the following
century the festivals were still revolving in the old style.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Institution
of the fixed
Alexandrian
year by
the
Romans.</note>
The reform which the Macedonian king had vainly
attempted to impose upon his people was accomplished by
the practical Romans when they took over the administration
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
of the country. The expedient by which they effected
the change was a simple one; indeed it was no other than
that to which Ptolemy Euergetes had resorted for the same
purpose. They merely intercalated one day at the end of
every four years, thus equalizing within a small fraction four
calendar years to four solar years. Henceforth the official
and the natural calendars were in practical agreement. The
movable Egyptian year had been converted into the fixed
Alexandrian year, as it was called, which agreed with the
Julian year in length and in its system of intercalation,
though it differed from that year in retaining the twelve
equal Egyptian months and five supplementary days.<note place='foot'>On the Alexandrian year see L.
Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 140
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> That admirable chronologer
argued (pp. 153-161) that the innovation
was introduced not, as had
been commonly supposed, in 25 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>,
but in 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, the year in which
Augustus defeated Mark Antony under
the walls of Alexandria and captured
the city. However, the question seems
to be still unsettled. See F. K. Ginzel,
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen und
technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
who thinks it probable that the change
was made in 26 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> For the purposes
of this study the precise date of the
introduction of the Alexandrian year is
not material.</note> But
while the new calendar received the sanction of law and
regulated the business of government, the ancient calendar
was too firmly established in popular usage to be at once
displaced. Accordingly it survived for ages side by side with
its modern rival.<note place='foot'>In demotic the fixed Alexandrian
year is called <q>the year of the
Ionians,</q> while the old movable year
is styled <q>the year of the Egyptians.</q>
Documents have been found which are
dated by the day and the month of
both years. See H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Ägyptologie</hi>, pp. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The spread of Christianity, which required
a fixed year for the due observance of its festivals, did much
to promote the adoption of the new Alexandrian style, and
by the beginning of the fifth century the ancient movable year
of Egypt appears to have been not only dead but forgotten.<note place='foot'>L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 149-152.
Macrobius thought that the Egyptians
had always employed a solar year of
365-¼ days (<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 2, i. 14. 3).
The ancient calendar of the Mexicans
resembled that of the Egyptians except
that it was divided into eighteen months
of twenty days each (instead of twelve
months of thirty days each), with five
supplementary days added at the end
of the year. These supplementary
days (<foreign rend='italic'>nemontemi</foreign>) were deemed unlucky:
nothing was done on them:
they were dedicated to no deity; and
persons born on them were considered
unfortunate. See B. de Sahagun,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire générale des choses de la
Nouvelle-Espagne</hi>, traduite par D.
Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 1880),
pp. 50, 164; F. S. Clavigero, <hi rend='italic'>History
of Mexico</hi> (London, 1807), i. 290.
Unlike the Egyptian calendar, however,
the Mexican appears to have
been regularly corrected by intercalation
so as to bring it into harmony
with the solar year. But as to the
mode of intercalation our authorities
differ. According to the positive
statement of Sahagun, one of the
earliest and best authorities, the
Mexicans corrected the deficiency of
their year by intercalating one day in
every fourth year, which is precisely the
correction adopted in the Alexandrian
and the Julian calendar. See B. de
Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 286 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, where
he expressly asserts the falsehood of
the view that the bissextile year was
unknown to the Mexicans. This
weighty statement is confirmed by the
practice of the Indians of Yucatan.
Like the Aztecs, they reckoned a year
to consist of 360 days divided into
18 months of 20 days each, with 5
days added so as to make a total of
365 days, but every fourth year they
intercalated a day so as to make a
total of 366 days. See Diego de
Landa, <hi rend='italic'>Relation des choses de Yucatan</hi>
(Paris, 1864), pp. 202 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> On the
other hand the historian Clavigero,
who lived in the eighteenth century,
but used earlier authorities, tells us
that the Mexicans <q>did not interpose
a day every four years, but thirteen
days (making use here even of this
favourite number) every fifty-two years;
which produces the same regulation of
time</q> (<hi rend='italic'>History of Mexico</hi>, Second
Edition, London, 1807, vol. i. p. 293).
However, the view that the Mexicans
corrected their year by intercalation is
rejected by Professor E. Seler. See his
<q>Mexican Chronology,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin 28</hi>
of the Bureau of American Ethnology
(Washington, 1904), pp. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; and
on the other side Miss Zelia Nuttall,
<q>The Periodical Adjustments of the
Ancient Mexican Calendar,</q> <hi rend='italic'>American
Anthropologist</hi>, N.S. vi. (1904) pp.
486-500.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Calendar of the Egyptian Farmer.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Rise and Fall of the Nile.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Rise and Fall of the Nile.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In Egypt
the operations
of
husbandry
are
dependent
on the
annual rise
and fall of
the Nile.</note>
If the Egyptian farmer of the olden time could thus get no
help, except at the rarest intervals, from the official or sacerdotal
calendar, he must have been compelled to observe for
himself those natural signals which marked the times for the
various operations of husbandry. In all ages of which we
possess any records the Egyptians have been an agricultural
people, dependent for their subsistence on the growth of the
corn. The cereals which they cultivated were wheat, barley,
and apparently sorghum (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Holcus sorghum</foreign>, Linnaeus), the
<foreign rend='italic'>doora</foreign> of the modern fellaheen.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 36, with A. Wiedemann's
note; Diodorus Siculus, i. 14-1,
i. 17. 1; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> v. 57
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, xviii. 60; Sir J. Gardiner Wilkinson,
<hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London, 1878),
ii. 398, 399, 418, 426 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben im
Altertum</hi>, pp. 577 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. de Candolle,
<hi rend='italic'>Origin of Cultivated Plants</hi>
(London, 1884), pp. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 369,
381; G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne
des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 66.</note> Then as now the whole
country, with the exception of a fringe on the coast of the
Mediterranean, was almost rainless, and owed its immense
fertility entirely to the annual inundation of the Nile, which,
regulated by an elaborate system of dams and canals, was
distributed over the fields, renewing the soil year by year
with a fresh deposit of mud washed down from the great
equatorial lakes and the mountains of Abyssinia. Hence
the rise of the river has always been watched by the inhabitants
with the utmost anxiety; for if it either falls short
of or exceeds a certain height, dearth and famine are the
inevitable consequences.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 14; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 36; Strabo, xvii. 1. 3, pp.
786-788; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii. 167-170;
Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Natur. Quaest.</hi> iv. 2.
1-10; E. W. Lane, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Modern Egyptians</hi> (Paisley
and London, 1895), pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 495
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 21-25;
G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> However,
since the Suez Canal was cut,
rain has been commoner in Lower
Egypt (A. H. Sayce on Herodotus,
ii. 14).</note> The water begins to rise early in
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
June, but it is not until the latter half of July that it swells to
a mighty tide. By the end of September the inundation is
at its greatest height. The country is now submerged, and
presents the appearance of a sea of turbid water, from which
the towns and villages, built on higher ground, rise like
islands. For about a month the flood remains nearly
stationary, then sinks more and more rapidly, till by December
or January the river has returned to its ordinary
bed. With the approach of summer the level of the water
continues to fall. In the early days of June the Nile is
reduced to half its ordinary breadth; and Egypt, scorched
by the sun, blasted by the wind that has blown from the
Sahara for many days, seems a mere continuation of the
desert. The trees are choked with a thick layer of grey
dust. A few meagre patches of vegetables, watered with
difficulty, struggle painfully for existence in the immediate
neighbourhood of the villages. Some appearance of verdure
lingers beside the canals and in the hollows from which the
moisture has not wholly evaporated. The plain appears to
pant in the pitiless sunshine, bare, dusty, ash-coloured,
cracked and seamed as far as the eye can see with a network
of fissures. From the middle of April till the middle
of June the land of Egypt is but half alive, waiting for the
new Nile.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des
Peuples de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 22-26;
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, p. 23. According
to Lane (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) the Nile
rises in Egypt about the summer solstice
(June 21) and reaches its greatest
height by the autumnal equinox (September 22).
This agrees exactly with
the statement of Diodorus Siculus (i.
36. 2). Herodotus says (ii. 19) that
the rise of the river lasted for a hundred
days from the summer solstice.
Compare Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> v. 57,
xviii. 167; Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Quaest.</hi> iv.
2. 1. According to Prof. Ginzel the
Nile does not rise in Egypt till the last
week of June (<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
i. 154). For ancient descriptions of
Egypt in time of flood see Herodotus,
ii. 97; Diodorus Siculus, i. 36. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Strabo, xvii. 1. 4, p. 788; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>De
natura animalium</hi>, x. 43; Achilles
Tatius, iv. 12; Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Natur. Quaest.</hi>
iv. 2. 8 and 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Irrigation,
sowing,
and harvest
in Egypt.</note>
For countless ages this cycle of natural events has
determined the annual labours of the Egyptian husbandman.
The first work of the agricultural year is the cutting
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
of the dams which have hitherto prevented the swollen
river from flooding the canals and the fields. This is done,
and the pent-up waters released on their beneficent mission,
in the first half of August.<note place='foot'>Sir J. Gardiner Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1878), ii. 365 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. W.
Lane, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the
Modern Egyptians</hi> (Paisley and London,
1895), pp. 498 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G. Maspero,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient
Classique</hi>, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 69. The last-mentioned
writer says (p. 24) that the
dams are commonly cut between the
first and sixteenth of July, but apparently
he means August.</note> In November, when the inundation
has subsided, wheat, barley, and sorghum are sown.
The time of harvest varies with the district, falling about a
month later in the north than in the south. In Upper or
Southern Egypt barley is reaped at the beginning of March,
wheat at the beginning of April, and sorghum about the
end of that month.<note place='foot'>Sir J. D. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 398
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Prof. W. M. Flinders Petrie, cited
above, vol. i. p. 231, note 3. According
to Pliny (<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii. 60) barley
was reaped in Egypt in the sixth month
from sowing, and wheat in the seventh
month. Diodorus Siculus, on the other
hand, says (i. 36. 4) that the corn was
reaped after four or five months. Perhaps
Pliny refers to Lower, and Diodorus
to Upper Egypt. Elsewhere
Pliny affirms (<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xviii. 169)
that the corn was sown at the beginning
of November, and that the reaping
began at the end of March and was
completed in May. This certainly
applies better to Lower than to Upper
Egypt.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The events
of the agricultural
year were
probably
celebrated
with
religious
rites.</note>
It is natural to suppose that these various events of the
agricultural year were celebrated by the Egyptian farmer
with some simple religious rites designed to secure the
blessing of the gods upon his labours. These rustic ceremonies
he would continue to perform year after year at
the same season, while the solemn festivals of the priests
continued to shift, with the shifting calendar, from summer
through spring to winter, and so backward through autumn
to summer. The rites of the husbandman were stable
because they rested on direct observation of nature: the
rites of the priest were unstable because they were based on
a false calculation. Yet many of the priestly festivals may
have been nothing but the old rural festivals disguised in the
course of ages by the pomp of sacerdotalism and severed, by
the error of the calendar, from their roots in the natural
cycle of the seasons.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Rites of Irrigation.'/>
<head>§ 2. Rites of Irrigation.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mourning
for Osiris
at midsummer
when the
Nile begins
to rise.</note>
These conjectures are confirmed by the little we know
both of the popular and of the official Egyptian religion.
Thus we are told that the Egyptians held a festival of Isis
at the time when the Nile began to rise. They believed
that the goddess was then mourning for the lost Osiris, and
that the tears which dropped from her eyes swelled the
impetuous tide of the river.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, x. 32. 18.</note> Hence in Egyptian inscriptions
Isis is spoken of as she <q>who maketh the Nile to swell
and overflow, who maketh the Nile to swell in his season.</q><note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, ii. 278.</note>
Similarly the Toradjas of Central Celebes imagine that
showers of rain are the tears shed by the compassionate
gods in weeping for somebody who is about to die; a
shower in the morning is to them an infallible omen of
death.<note place='foot'>N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt, <hi rend='italic'>De
Bare'e-sprekende Toradjas van Midden-Celebes</hi>
(Batavia, 1912), i. 273. The
more civilized Indians of tropical
America, who practised agriculture
and had developed a barbaric art,
appear to have commonly represented
the rain-god in human form with tears
streaming down from his eyes. See
T. A. Joyce, <q>The Weeping God,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Essays and Studies presented to William
Ridgeway</hi> (Cambridge, 1913), pp. 365-374.</note> However, an uneasy suspicion would seem to have
occurred to the Egyptians that perhaps after all the tears of
the goddess might not suffice of themselves to raise the
water to the proper level; so in the time of Rameses II.
the king used on the first day of the flood to throw into the
Nile a written order commanding the river to do its duty,
and the submissive stream never failed to obey the royal
mandate.<note place='foot'>This we learn from inscriptions
at Silsilis. See A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Mystères
Égyptiens</hi> (Paris, 1913), p. 180.</note> Yet the ancient belief survives in a modified
form to this day. For the Nile, as we saw, begins to rise in
June about the time of the summer solstice, and the people
still attribute its increased volume to a miraculous drop
which falls into the river on the night of the seventeenth of
the month. The charms and divinations which they practise
on that mystic night in order to ascertain the length of their
own life and to rid the houses of bugs may well date from
a remote antiquity.<note place='foot'>E. W. Lane, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Modern Egyptians</hi> (Paisley and
London, 1895), ch. xxvi. pp. 495 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now if Osiris was in one of his aspects
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
a god of the corn, nothing could be more natural than that
he should be mourned at midsummer. For by that time the
harvest was past, the fields were bare, the river ran low, life
seemed to be suspended, the corn-god was dead. At such a
moment people who saw the handiwork of divine beings in
all the operations of nature might well trace the swelling of
the sacred stream to the tears shed by the goddess at the
death of the beneficent corn-god her husband.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sirius
regarded
as the star
of Isis. The rising
of Sirius
marked
the beginning
of
the sacred
Egyptian
year. The observation
of
the gradual
displacement
of
Sirius in
the calendar
led to
the determination
of the true
length of
the solar
year.</note>
And the sign of the rising waters on earth was accompanied
by a sign in heaven. For in the early days of
Egyptian history, some three or four thousand years before
the beginning of our era, the splendid star of Sirius, the
brightest of all the fixed stars, appeared at dawn in the east
just before sunrise about the time of the summer solstice,
when the Nile begins to rise.<note place='foot'>L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>,
i. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; R. Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>Die Chronologie
der Aegypter</hi>, i. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. K.
Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 190
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ed. Meyer, <q>Nachträge zur
ägyptischen Chronologie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen
der königl. Preuss. Akademie
der Wissenschaften</hi>, 1907 (Berlin,
1908), pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des
Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The
coincidence of the rising of Sirius with
the swelling of the Nile is mentioned
by Tibullus (i. 7. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) and Aelian
(<hi rend='italic'>De natura animalium</hi>, x. 45). In
later times, as a consequence of the
precession of the equinoxes, the rising
of Sirius gradually diverged from the
summer solstice, falling later and later
in the solar year. In the sixteenth
and fifteenth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Sirius rose
seventeen days after the summer
solstice, and at the date of the Canopic
decree (238 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>) it rose a whole
month after the first swelling of the
Nile. See L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 130;
F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 190; Ed.
Meyer, <q>Nachträge zur ägyptischen
Chronologie,</q> pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According
to Censorinus (<hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xxi. 10),
Sirius regularly rose in Egypt on the
twentieth of July (Julian calendar);
and this was true of latitude 30° in
Egypt (the latitude nearly of Heliopolis
and Memphis) for about three thousand
years of Egyptian history. See L.
Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 128-130. But the
date of the rising of the star is not
the same throughout Egypt; it varies
with the latitude, and the variation
within the limits of Egypt amounts to
seven days or more. Roughly speaking,
Sirius rises nearly a whole day
earlier for each degree of latitude you
go south. Thus, whereas near Alexandria
in the north Sirius does not rise
till the twenty-second of July, at Syene
in the south it rises on the sixteenth
of July. See R. Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
168 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Now it is to be remembered
that the rising of the Nile, as well as
the rising of Sirius, is observed earlier
and earlier the further south you go.
The coincident variation of the two
phenomena could hardly fail to confirm
the Egyptians in their belief of a
natural or supernatural connexion between
them.</note> The Egyptians called it
Sothis, and regarded it as the star of Isis,<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 27. 4; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 21, 22, 38, 61;
Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De antro nympharum</hi>, 24;
Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, ii.
517; Canopic decree, lines 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, in
W. Dittenberger's <hi rend='italic'>Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones
Selectae</hi>, vol. i. p. 102, No.
56 (lines 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> in Ch. Michel's <hi rend='italic'>Recueil
d'Inscriptions Grecques</hi>, p. 417,
No. 551); R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario
di Mitologia Egizia</hi>, pp. 825 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On
the ceiling of the Memnonium at
Thebes the heliacal rising of Sirius is
represented under the form and name
of Isis (Sir J. G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>,
London, 1878, iii. 102).</note> just as the
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
Babylonians deemed the planet Venus the star of Astarte.
To both peoples apparently the brilliant luminary in the
morning sky seemed the goddess of life and love come to
mourn her departed lover or spouse and to wake him from the
dead. Hence the rising of Sirius marked the beginning of the
sacred Egyptian year,<note place='foot'>Porphyry and the Canopic decree,
<hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi>; Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii.
10, xxi. 10. In inscriptions on the
temple at Syene, the modern Assuan,
Isis is called <q>the mistress of the beginning
of the year,</q> the goddess
<q>who revolves about the world, near
to the constellation of Orion, who rises
in the eastern sky and passes to the
west perpetually</q> (R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 826). According to some, the
festival of the rising of Sirius and the
beginning of the sacred year was held
on the nineteenth, not the twentieth
of July. See Ed. Meyer, <q>Ägyptische
Chronologie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der
königl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften</hi>,
1904, pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Nachträge zur ägyptischen Chronologie,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königl.
Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften</hi>,
1907, pp. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des
Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. pp. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 98 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and was regularly celebrated by a festival
which did not shift with the shifting official year.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Eudoxi ars astronomica, qualis
in charta Aegyptiaca superest</hi>, ed.
F. Blass (Kiliae, 1887), p. 14, οἱ δὲ
ἀσ[τρο]λ[ό]γοι καὶ οἱ ἱερογραμμ[ατεῖς]
χ[ρῶν]ται ταῖς κατὰ σελή[ν]ἠ[ν] ἡμ[έ]ραις
καὶ ἄγουσι πανδημ[ι]κὰς ἕ[ορ]τας
τινὰς μὲν ὡς ἐνομί[σθ]ἠ τὰ δὲ καταχυτήρια
καὶ κυνὸς ἀνατολὴν καὶ σεληναῖα
κατὰ θεό[ν], ἀναλεγόμενοι τὰς ἡμέρας ἐκ
τῶν Αἰγυπτίων. This statement of
Eudoxus or of one of his pupils is
important, since it definitely proves
that, besides the shifting festivals of
the shifting official year, the Egyptians
celebrated other festivals, which were
dated by direct observation of natural
phenomena, namely, the annual inundation,
the rise of Sirius, and the
phases of the moon. The same distinction
of the fixed from the movable
festivals is indicated in one of the
Hibeh papyri, but the passage is unfortunately
mutilated. See <hi rend='italic'>The Hibeh
Papyri</hi>, part i., edited by B. P. Grenfell
and A. S. Hunt (London, 1906),
pp. 145, 151 (pointed out to me by
my friend Mr. W. Wyse). The
annual festival in honour of Ptolemy
and Berenice was fixed on the day of
the rising of Sirius. See the Canopic
decree, in W. Dittenberger's <hi rend='italic'>Orientis
Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</hi>, No. 56
(vol. i. pp. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).
</p>
<p>
The rise of Sirius was carefully
observed by the islanders of Ceos, in
the Aegean. They watched for it
with arms in their hands and sacrificed
on the mountains to the star, drawing
from its aspect omens of the salubrity
or unhealthiness of the coming year.
The sacrifice was believed to secure the
advent of the cool North winds (the
Etesian winds as the Greeks call
them), which regularly begin to blow
about this time of the year, and mitigate
the oppressive heat of summer in
the Aegean. See Apollonius Rhodius,
<hi rend='italic'>Argon.</hi> ii. 516-527, with the notes of
the Scholiast on vv. 498, 526; Theophrastus,
<hi rend='italic'>De ventis</hi>, ii. 14; Clement
of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> vi. 3. 29, p. 753,
ed. Potter; Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> v. 269-279;
Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Astronomica</hi>, ii. 4;
Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De divinatione</hi>, i. 57. 130;
M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>
(Leipsic, 1906), pp. 6-8; C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <hi rend='italic'>Physikalische
Geographie von Griechenland</hi> (Breslau,
1885), pp. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> On the top of
Mount Pelion in Thessaly there was a
sanctuary of Zeus, where sacrifices were
offered at the rising of Sirius, in the
height of the summer, by men of rank,
who were chosen by the priest and
wore fresh sheep-skins. See [Dicaearchus,]
<q>Descriptio Graeciae,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Geographi
Graeci Minores</hi>, ed. C. Müller,
i. 107; <hi rend='italic'>Historicorum Graecorum Fragmenta</hi>,
ed. C. Müller, ii. 262.</p></note> The
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
first day of the first month Thoth was theoretically supposed
to date from the heliacal rising of the bright star, and in all
probability it really did so when the official or civil year of
three hundred and sixty-five days was first instituted. But
the miscalculation which has been already explained<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> had
the effect of making the star to shift its place in the calendar
by one day in four years. Thus if Sirius rose on the first
of Thoth in one year, it would rise on the second of Thoth
four years afterwards, on the third of Thoth eight years
afterwards, and so on until after the lapse of a Siriac or
Sothic period of fourteen hundred and sixty solar years the
first of Thoth again coincided with the heliacal rising of
Sirius.<note place='foot'><p>We know from Censorinus (<hi rend='italic'>De die
natali</hi>, xxi. 10) that the first of Thoth
coincided with the heliacal rising of
Sirius on July 20 (Julian calendar) in
the year 139 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Hence reckoning
backwards by Sothic periods of 1460
solar years we may infer that Sirius
rose on July 20th (Julian calendar) in
the years 1321 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, 2781 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, and
4241 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>; and accordingly that the
civil or vague Egyptian year of 365
days was instituted in one of these
years. In favour of supposing that it
was instituted either in 2781 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> or
4241 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, it may be said that in both
these years the rising of Sirius nearly
coincided with the summer solstice and
the rising of the Nile; whereas in the
year 1321 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> the summer solstice,
and with it the rising of the Nile, fell
nineteen days before the rising of Sirius
and the first of Thoth. Now when we
consider the close causal connexion
which the Egyptians traced between
the rising of Sirius and the rising of
the Nile, it seems probable that they
started the new calendar on the first
of Thoth in a year in which the two
natural phenomena coincided rather
than in one in which they diverged
from each other by nineteen days.
Prof. Ed. Meyer decides in favour of
the year 4241 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> as the date of the
introduction of the Egyptian calendar
on the ground that the calendar was
already well known in the Old Kingdom.
See L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 125
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Ed. Meyer, <q>Nachträge zur ägyptischen
Chronologie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen
der königl. Preuss. Akademie der
Wissenschaften</hi>, 1907 (Berlin, 1908),
pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2. pp. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 98 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
When the fixed Alexandrian year was
introduced in 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> (see above, pp.
<ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) the first of Thoth fell on
August 29, which accordingly was
thenceforth reckoned the first day of
the year in the Alexandrian calendar.
See L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The
period of 1460 solar or 1461 movable
Egyptian years was variously called a
Sothic period (Clement of Alexandria,
<hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> i. 21. 136, p. 401 ed. Potter),
a Canicular year (from <hi rend='italic'>Canicula</hi>, <q>the
Dog-star,</q> that is, Sirius), a heliacal
year, and a year of God (Censorinus,
<hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>, xviii. 10). But there is
no evidence or probability that the
period was recognized by the Egyptian
astronomers who instituted the movable
year of 365 days. Rather, as
Ideler pointed out (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 132), it
must have been a later discovery based
on continued observations of the heliacal
rising of Sirius and of its gradual displacement
through the whole length of
the official calendar. Brugsch, indeed,
went so far as to suppose that the
period was a discovery of astronomers
of the second century <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, to which
they were led by the coincidence of
the first of Thoth with the heliacal
rising of Sirius in 139 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Die
Ägyptologie</hi>, p. 357). But the discovery,
based as it is on a very simple
calculation (365 × 4 = 1460), could
hardly fail to be made as soon as
astronomers estimated the length of
the solar year at 365-¼ days, and that
they did so at least as early as 238 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>
is proved conclusively by the Canopic
decree. See above, pp. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 27. As to
the Sothic period see further R. Lepsius,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Chronologie der Aegypter</hi>, i. 165
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
</p>
<p>
For the convenience of the reader I
subjoin a table of the Egyptian months,
with their dates, as these fell, (1) in a
year when the first of Thoth coincided
with July 20 of the Julian calendar,
and (2) in the fixed Alexandrian year.
</p>
<p>
Egyptian Months, Sothic Year beginning July 20, Alexandrian Year.<lb/>
1 Thoth, 20 July, 29 August<lb/>
1 Phaophi, 19 August, 28 September<lb/>
1 Atbyr, 18 September, 28 October<lb/>
1 Khoiak, 18 October, 27 November<lb/>
1 Tybi, 17 November, 27 December<lb/>
1 Mechir, 17 December, 26 January<lb/>
1 Phamenoth, 16 January, 25 February<lb/>
1 Pharmuthi, 15 February, 27 March<lb/>
1 Pachon, 17 March, 26 April<lb/>
1 Payni, 16 April, 26 May<lb/>
1 Epiphi, 16 May, 25 June<lb/>
1 Mesori, 15 June, 25 July<lb/>
1 Supplementary, 15 July, 24 August
</p>
<p>
See L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
F. K. Ginzel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 200.</p></note> This observation of the gradual displacement of
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
the star in the calendar has been of the utmost importance
for the progress of astronomy, since it led the Egyptians
directly to the determination of the approximately true
length of the solar year and thus laid the basis of our
modern calendar; for the Julian calendar, which we owe
to Caesar, was founded on the Egyptian theory, though not
on the Egyptian practice.<note place='foot'>The Canopic decree (above, p.
<ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>) suffices to prove that the
Egyptian astronomers, long before
Caesar's time, were well acquainted
with the approximately exact length of
the solar year, although they did not
use their knowledge to correct the
calendar except for a short time in the
reign of Ptolemy Euergetes. With
regard to Caesar's debt to the Egyptian
astronomers see Dio Cassius, xliii. 26;
Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn</hi>, i. 14. 3, i. 16. 39;
L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 166
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It was therefore a fortunate
moment for the world when some pious Egyptian, thousands
of years ago, identified for the first time the bright star of
Sirius with his goddess; for the identification induced his
countrymen to regard the heavenly body with an attention
which they would never have paid to it if they had known
it to be nothing but a world vastly greater than our own
and separated from it by an inconceivable, if not immeasurable,
abyss of space.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed in
Egypt at
the cutting
of the
dams early
in August.
The Bride
of the Nile.
Sacrifices
offered by
savages at
the cutting
of dams.</note>
The cutting of the dams and the admission of the water
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
into the canals and fields is a great event in the Egyptian
year. At Cairo the operation generally takes place between
the sixth and the sixteenth of August, and till lately was
attended by ceremonies which deserve to be noticed, because
they were probably handed down from antiquity. An
ancient canal, known by the name of the Khalíj, formerly
passed through the native town of Cairo. Near its entrance
the canal was crossed by a dam of earth, very broad at
the bottom and diminishing in breadth upwards, which used
to be constructed before or soon after the Nile began to
rise. In front of the dam, on the side of the river, was
reared a truncated cone of earth called the <foreign rend='italic'>'arooseh</foreign> or
<q>bride,</q> on the top of which a little maize or millet was
generally sown. This <q>bride</q> was commonly washed down
by the rising tide a week or a fortnight before the cutting
of the dam. Tradition runs that the old custom was to
deck a young virgin in gay apparel and throw her into
the river as a sacrifice to obtain a plentiful inundation.<note place='foot'>E. W. Lane, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and
Customs of the Modern Egyptians</hi>
(Paisley and London, 1895), ch. xxvi.
pp. 499 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Certainly human sacrifices were offered for a similar purpose
by the Wajagga of German East Africa down to recent
years. These people irrigate their fields by means of skilfully
constructed channels, through which they conduct the
water of the mountain brooks and rivers to the thirsty land.
They imagine that the spirits of their forefathers dwell
in the rocky basins of these rushing streams, and that they
would resent the withdrawal of the water to irrigate the
fields if compensation were not offered to them. The
water-rate paid to them consisted of a child, uncircumcised
and of unblemished body, who was decked with ornaments
and bells and thrown into the river to drown, before they
ventured to draw off the water into the irrigation channel.
Having thrown him in, his executioners shewed a clean
pair of heels, because they expected the river to rise in flood
at once on receipt of the water-rate.<note place='foot'>Bruno Gutmann, <q>Feldbausitten
und Wachstumsbräuche der Wadschagga,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</hi>,
xlv. (1913) pp. 484 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In similar circumstances
the Njamus of British East Africa sacrifice a sheep
before they let the water of the stream flow into the ditch
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
or artificial channel. The fat, dung, and blood of the
animal are sprinkled at the mouth of the ditch and in
the water; thereupon the dam is broken down and the
stream pours into the ditch. The sacrifice may only be
offered by a man of the Il Mayek clan, and for two days
afterwards he wears the skin of the beast tied round his
head. No one may quarrel with this man while the water
is irrigating the crops, else the people believe that the water
would cease to flow in the ditch; more than that, if the
men of the Il Mayek clan were angry and sulked for ten
days, the water would dry up permanently for that season.
Hence the Il Mayek clan enjoys great consideration in the
tribe, since the crops are thought to depend on their good
will and good offices. Ten elders assist at the sacrifice of
the sheep, though they may take no part in it. They must
all be of a particular age; and after the ceremony they
may not cohabit with their wives until harvest, and they are
obliged to sleep at night in their granaries. Curiously enough,
too, while the water is irrigating the fields, nobody may kill
waterbuck, eland, oryx, zebra, rhinoceros, or hippopotamus.
Anybody caught red-handed in the act of breaking this game-law
would at once be cast out of the village.<note place='foot'>Hon. K. R. Dundas, <q>Notes
on the tribes inhabiting the Baringo
District, East Africa Protectorate,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xl. (1910) p. 54.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Modern
Egyptian
ceremony
at the
cutting of
the dams.</note>
Whether the <q>bride</q> who used to figure at the ceremony
of cutting the dam in Cairo was ever a live woman or not,
the intention of the practice appears to have been to marry
the river, conceived as a male power, to his bride the corn-land,
which was soon to be fertilized by his water. The
ceremony was therefore a charm to ensure the growth of the
crops. As such it probably dated, in one form or another,
from ancient times. Dense crowds assembled to witness
the cutting of the dam. The operation was performed
before sunrise, and many people spent the preceding night
on the banks of the canal or in boats lit with lamps on the
river, while fireworks were displayed and guns discharged
at frequent intervals. Before sunrise a great number of
workmen began to cut the dam, and the task was accomplished
about an hour before the sun appeared on the
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
horizon. When only a thin ridge of earth remained, a boat
with an officer on board was propelled against it, and
breaking through the slight barrier descended with the rush
of water into the canal. The Governor of Cairo flung a
purse of gold into the boat as it passed. Formerly the
custom was to throw money into the canal. The populace
used to dive after it, and several lives were generally lost
in the scramble.<note place='foot'>E. W. Lane, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 500-504;
Sir Auckland Colvin, <hi rend='italic'>The Making of
Modern Egypt</hi> (London, 1906), pp.
278 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According to the latter writer,
a dressed dummy was thrown into the
river at each cutting of the dam.</note> This practice also would seem to have
been ancient, for Seneca tells us that at a place called
the Veins of the Nile, not far from Philae, the priests used
to cast money and offerings of gold into the river at a
festival which apparently took place at the rising of the
water.<note place='foot'>Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>Naturales Quaestiones</hi>,
iv. 2. 7. The cutting of the dams
is mentioned by Diodorus Siculus
(i. 36. 3), and the festival on that
occasion (τὰ καταχυτήρια) is noticed
by Eudoxus (or one of his pupils)
in a passage which has already been
quoted. See above, p. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, note 2.</note> At Cairo the time-honoured ceremony came to an
end in 1897, when the old canal was filled up. An electric
tramway now runs over the spot where for countless ages
crowds of worshippers or holiday-makers had annually
assembled to witness the marriage of the Nile.<note place='foot'>Sir Auckland Colvin, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Rites of Sowing.'/>
<head>§ 3. Rites of Sowing.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The sowing
of the
seed in
November.
Plutarch
on the
mournful
character
of the rites
of sowing. The sadness
of
autumn.</note>
The next great operation of the agricultural year in
Egypt is the sowing of the seed in November, when the
water of the inundation has retreated from the fields. With
the Egyptians, as with many peoples of antiquity, the committing
of the seed to the earth assumed the character of
a solemn and mournful rite. On this subject I will let
Plutarch speak for himself. <q>What,</q> he asks, <q>are we to
make of the gloomy, joyless, and mournful sacrifices, if it is
wrong either to omit the established rites or to confuse and
disturb our conceptions of the gods by absurd suspicions?
For the Greeks also perform many rites which resemble
those of the Egyptians and are observed about the same
time. Thus at the festival of the Thesmophoria in Athens
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
women sit on the ground and fast. And the Boeotians
open the vaults of the Sorrowful One,<note place='foot'>Τῆς Ἀχαίας. Plutarch derives the
name from ἄχος, <q>pain,</q> <q>grief.</q>
But the etymology is uncertain. It
has lately been proposed to derive the
epithet from ὀχή, <q>nourishment.</q> See
M. P. Nilsson, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>
(Leipsic, 1906), p. 326. As to the
vaults (μέγαρα) of Demeter see Pausanias,
ix. 8. 1; Scholiast on Lucian,
<hi rend='italic'>Dial. Meretr.</hi> ii. pp. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed.
H. Rabe (Leipsic, 1906).</note> naming that festival
sorrowful because Demeter is sorrowing for the descent of
the Maiden. The month is the month of sowing about the
setting of the Pleiades.<note place='foot'>In antiquity the Pleiades set at
dawn about the end of October or
early in November. See L. Ideler,
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen und
technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 242; Aug.
Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Chronologie</hi> (Leipsic, 1883),
pp. 16, 27; G. F. Unger, <q>Zeitrechnung
der Griechen und Römer,</q> in
Iwan Müller's <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der klassischen
Altertumswissenschaft</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi> (Nördlingen,
1886) pp. 558, 585.</note> The Egyptians call it Athyr, the
Athenians Pyanepsion, the Boeotians the month of Demeter.
Theopompus informs us that the western peoples consider
and call the winter Cronus, the summer Aphrodite, and the
spring Persephone, and they believe that all things are
brought into being by Cronus and Aphrodite. The
Phrygians imagine that the god sleeps in winter and wakes
in summer, and accordingly they celebrate with Bacchic
rites the putting him to bed in winter and his awakening in
summer. The Paphlagonians allege that he is bound fast
and shut up in winter, but that he stirs and is set free in
spring. And the season furnishes a hint that the sadness is
for the hiding of those fruits of the earth which the ancients
esteemed, not indeed gods, but great and necessary gifts
bestowed by the gods in order that men might not lead the
life of savages and of wild beasts. For it was that time of
year when they saw some of the fruits vanishing and falling
from the trees, while they sowed others grudgingly and with
difficulty, scraping the earth with their hands and huddling
it up again, on the uncertain chance that what they deposited
in the ground would ever ripen and come to maturity. Thus
they did in many respects like those who bury and mourn
their dead. And just as we say that a purchaser of Plato's
books purchases Plato, or that an actor who plays the
comedies of Menander plays Menander, so the men of old
did not hesitate to call the gifts and products of the gods by
the names of the gods themselves, thereby honouring and
glorifying the things on account of their utility. But in
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
after ages simple folk in their ignorance applied to the gods
statements which only held true of the fruits of the earth,
and so they came not merely to say but actually to believe
that the growth and decay of plants, on which they subsisted,<note place='foot'>Τὰς παρουσίας τῶν ἀναγκαίων καί
ἀποκρύψεις.</note>
were the birth and the death of gods. Thus they fell into
absurd, immoral, and confused ways of thinking, though all
the while the absurdity of the fallacy was manifest. Hence
Xenophanes of Colophon declared that if the Egyptians
deemed their gods divine they should not weep for them,
and that if they wept for them they should not deem
them divine. <q>For it is ridiculous,</q> said he, <q>to lament
and pray that the fruits would be good enough to grow and
ripen again in order that they may again be eaten and
lamented.</q> But he was wrong, for though the lamentations
are for the fruits, the prayers are addressed to the gods, as
the causes and givers of them, that they would be pleased
to make fresh fruits to spring up instead of those that
perish.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 69-71.
With the sleep of the Phrygian
gods we may compare the sleep of
Vishnu. The toils and anxieties of
the Indian farmer <q>are continuous,
and his only period of comparative
rest is in the heavy rain time, when,
as he says, the god Vishnu goes to
sleep, and does not wake till October
is well advanced and the time has
come to begin cutting and crushing the
sugar-cane and boiling down the juice</q>
(W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Natives of Northern
India</hi>, London, 1907, p. 159).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Plutarch's
view that
the worship
of the
fruits of
the earth
sprang
from a
verbal
misunderstanding.</note>
In this interesting passage Plutarch expresses his belief
that the worship of the fruits of the earth was the result of
a verbal misapprehension or disease of language, as it has
been called by a modern school of mythologists, who explain
the origin of myths in general on the same easy principle of
metaphors misunderstood. Primitive man, on Plutarch's
theory, firmly believed that the fruits of the earth on which
he subsisted were not themselves gods but merely the gifts
of the gods, who were the real givers of all good things.
Yet at the same time men were in the habit of bestowing on
these divine products the names of their divine creators,
either out of gratitude or merely for the sake of brevity, as
when we say that a man has bought a Shakespeare or acted
Molière, when we mean that he has bought the works of
Shakespeare or acted the plays of Molière. This abbreviated
mode of expression was misunderstood in later times, and so
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
people came to look upon the fruits of the earth as themselves
divine instead of as being the work of divinities: in
short, they mistook the creature for the creator. In like
manner Plutarch would explain the Egyptian worship of
animals as reverence done not so much to the beasts themselves
as to the great god who displays the divine handiwork
in sentient organisms even more than in the most beautiful
and wonderful works of inanimate nature.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 77.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>His theory
is an
inversion
of the
truth: for
fetishism
is the
antecedent,
not the
corruption,
of theism.
Lamentations
of the
savage for
the animals
and plants
which he
kills and
eats.</note>
The comparative study of religion has proved that these
theories of Plutarch are an inversion of the truth. Fetishism,
or the view that the fruits of the earth and things in general
are divine or animated by powerful spirits, is not, as Plutarch
imagined, a late corruption of a pure and primitive theism,
which regarded the gods as the creators and givers of all
good things. On the contrary, fetishism is early and theism
is late in the history of mankind. In this respect Xenophanes,
whom Plutarch attempts to correct, displayed a much truer
insight into the mind of the savage. To weep crocodile
tears over the animals and plants which he kills and eats,
and to pray them to come again in order that they may
be again eaten and again lamented&mdash;this may seem absurd
to us, but it is precisely what the savage does. And from
his point of view the proceeding is not at all absurd but
perfectly rational and well calculated to answer his ends.
For he sincerely believes that animals and fruits are tenanted
by spirits who can harm him if they please, and who cannot
but be put to considerable inconvenience by that destruction
of their bodies which is unfortunately inseparable from the
processes of mastication and digestion. What more natural,
therefore, than that the savage should offer excuses to the
beasts and the fruits for the painful necessity he is under of
consuming them, and that he should endeavour to alleviate
their pangs by soft words and an air of respectful sympathy,
in order that they may bear him no grudge, and may in due
time come again to be again eaten and again lamented?
Judged by the standard of primitive manners the attitude of
the walrus to the oysters was strictly correct:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'><q>I weep for you,</q> the Walrus said:</hi></q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='none'><hi rend='italic'><q>I deeply sympathize.</q></hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>With sobs and tears he sorted out</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>Those of the largest size,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Holding his pocket-handkerchief</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Before his streaming eyes.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Respect
shown by
savages
for the
fruits and
the animals
which
they eat.</note>
Many examples of such hypocritical lamentations for
animals, drawn not from the fancy of a playful writer but
from the facts of savage life, could be cited.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>,
ii. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Here I
shall quote the general statement of a writer on the Indians
of British Columbia, because it covers the case of vegetable
as well as of animal food. After describing the respectful
welcome accorded by the Stlatlum Indians to the first
<q>sock-eye</q> salmon which they have caught in the season,
he goes on: <q>The significance of these ceremonies is easy
to perceive when we remember the attitude of the Indians
towards nature generally, and recall their myths relating to
the salmon, and their coming to their rivers and streams.
Nothing that the Indian of this region eats is regarded by
him as mere food and nothing more. Not a single plant,
animal, or fish, or other object upon which he feeds, is
looked upon in this light, or as something he has secured
for himself by his own wit and skill. He regards it rather
as something which has been voluntarily and compassionately
placed in his hands by the goodwill and consent of the
'spirit' of the object itself, or by the intercession and magic
of his culture-heroes; to be retained and used by him only
upon the fulfilment of certain conditions. These conditions
include respect and reverent care in the killing or plucking
of the animal or plant and proper treatment of the parts he
has no use for, such as the bones, blood, and offal; and the
depositing of the same in some stream or lake, so that the
object may by that means renew its life and physical form.
The practices in connection with the killing of animals and
the gathering of plants and fruits all make this quite clear,
and it is only when we bear this attitude of the savage
towards nature in mind that we can hope to rightly understand
the motives and purposes of many of his strange
customs and beliefs.</q><note place='foot'>C. Hill Tout, <q>Report on the
Ethnology of the Stlatlum Indians of
British Columbia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxv. (1905)
pp. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus the
lamentations
of
the sower
become
intelligible.</note>
We can now understand why among many peoples of
antiquity, as Plutarch tells us, the time of sowing was a
time of sorrow. The laying of the seed in the earth was
a burial of the divine element, and it was fitting that like a
human burial it should be performed with gravity and the
semblance, if not the reality, of sorrow. Yet they sorrowed
not without hope, perhaps a sure and certain hope, that the
seed which they thus committed with sighs and tears to
the ground would yet rise from the dust and yield fruit a
hundredfold to the reaper. <q>They that sow in tears shall
reap in joy. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing
precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing,
bringing his sheaves with him.</q><note place='foot'>Psalm cxxvi. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Firmicus
Maternus asks the Egyptians (<hi rend='italic'>De
errore profanarum religionum</hi>, ii. 7),
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cur plangitis fruges terrae et crescentia
lugetis semina?</foreign></q></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Rites of Harvest.'/>
<head>§ 4. Rites of Harvest.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Lamentations
of
the
Egyptian
corn-reapers.</note>
The Egyptian harvest, as we have seen, falls not in
autumn but in spring, in the months of March, April, and
May. To the husbandman the time of harvest, at least in a
good year, must necessarily be a season of joy: in bringing
home his sheaves he is requited for his long and anxious
labours. Yet if the old Egyptian farmer felt a secret joy
at reaping and garnering the grain, it was essential that he
should conceal the natural emotion under an air of profound
dejection. For was he not severing the body of the corn-god
with his sickle and trampling it to pieces under the
hoofs of his cattle on the threshing-floor?<note place='foot'>As to the Egyptian modes of
reaping and threshing see Sir J.
Gardiner Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1878), ii. 419 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A.
Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp. 572 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Accordingly we
are told that it was an ancient custom of the Egyptian corn-reapers
to beat their breasts and lament over the first sheaf
cut, while at the same time they called upon Isis.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 14. 2.</note> The
invocation seems to have taken the form of a melancholy
chant, to which the Greeks gave the name of Maneros.
Similar plaintive strains were chanted by corn-reapers in
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
Phoenicia and other parts of Western Asia.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 79; Julius Pollux,
iv. 54; Pausanias, ix. 29. 7; Athenaeus,
xiv. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, pp. 618-620. As to
these songs see <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and
of the Wild</hi>, i. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Probably all
these doleful ditties were lamentations for the corn-god
killed by the sickles of the reapers. In Egypt the slain
deity was Osiris, and the name <hi rend='italic'>Maneros</hi> applied to the dirge
appears to be derived from certain words meaning <q>Come
to thy house,</q> which often occur in the lamentations for the
dead god.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Adonisklage und
Linoslied</hi> (Berlin, 1852), p. 24, corrected
by A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Herodots
zweites Buch</hi>, p. 336. As to the lamentations
for Osiris see above, p. 12.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Similar
ceremonies
observed
by the
Cherokee
Indians
in the
cultivation
of the
corn.
The Old
Woman of
the corn
and the
laments for
her death.</note>
Ceremonies of the same sort have been observed by
other peoples, probably for the same purpose. Thus we are
told that among all vegetables corn (<foreign rend='italic'>selu</foreign>), by which is
apparently meant maize, holds the first place in the household
economy and the ceremonial observance of the
Cherokee Indians, who invoke it under the name of <q>the
Old Woman</q> in allusion to a myth that it sprang from
the blood of an old woman killed by her disobedient sons.
<q>Much ceremony accompanied the planting and tending of
the crop. Seven grains, the sacred number, were put into
each hill, and these were not afterwards thinned out. After
the last working of the crop, the priest and an assistant&mdash;generally
the owner of the field&mdash;went into the field and
built a small enclosure in the centre. Then entering it,
they seated themselves upon the ground, with heads bent
down, and while the assistant kept perfect silence the priest,
with rattle in hand, sang songs of invocation to the spirit of
the corn. Soon, according to the orthodox belief, a loud
rustling would be heard outside, which they would know
was caused by the <q>Old Woman</q> bringing the corn into the
field, but neither must look up until the song was finished.
This ceremony was repeated on four successive nights, after
which no one entered the field for seven other nights, when
the priest himself went in, and, if all the sacred regulations
had been properly observed, was rewarded by finding young
ears upon the stalks. The corn ceremonies could be performed
by the owner of the field himself, provided he was
willing to pay a sufficient fee to the priest in order to learn
the songs and ritual. Care was always taken to keep a
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
clean trail from the field to the house, so that the corn
might be encouraged to stay at home and not go wandering
elsewhere. Most of these customs have now fallen into disuse
excepting among the old people, by many of whom
they are still religiously observed. Another curious ceremony,
of which even the memory is now almost forgotten, was
enacted after the first working of the corn, when the owner
or priest stood in succession at each of the four corners of
the field and wept and wailed loudly. Even the priests are
now unable to give a reason for this performance, which may
have been a lament for the bloody death of Selu,</q> the Old
Woman of the Corn.<note place='foot'>J. Mooney, <q>Myths of the
Cherokee,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Annual Report
of the Bureau of American
Ethnology</hi> (Washington, 1900), pp.
423 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> I do not know what precisely
the writer means by <q>the last working
of the crop</q> and <q>the first working of
the corn.</q></note> In these Cherokee practices the
lamentations and the invocations of the Old Woman of
the Corn resemble the ancient Egyptian customs of lamenting
over the first corn cut and calling upon Isis, herself
probably in one of her aspects an Old Woman of the Corn.
Further, the Cherokee precaution of leaving a clear path
from the field to the house resembles the Egyptian invitation
to Osiris, <q>Come to thy house.</q> So in the East Indies
to this day people observe elaborate ceremonies for the
purpose of bringing back the Soul of the Rice from the
fields to the barn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, i. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The Nandi of British East Africa perform
a ceremony in September when the eleusine grain is
ripening. Every woman who owns a plantation goes out
with her daughters into the cornfields and makes a bonfire
of the branches and leaves of certain trees (the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Solanum
campylanthum</foreign> and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Lantana salvifolia</foreign>). After that they pluck
some of the eleusine, and each of them puts one grain in her
necklace, chews another and rubs it on her forehead, throat,
and breast. <q>No joy is shown by the womenfolk on this
occasion, and they sorrowfully cut a basketful of the corn
which they take home with them and place in the loft to
dry.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), p. 46.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Lamentations
of
Indians at
cutting
sacred
wood.</note>
Just as the Egyptians lamented at cutting the corn,
so the Karok Indians of California lament at hewing the
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
sacred wood for the fire in the assembly-room. The
wood must be cut from a tree on the top of the highest
hill. In lopping off the boughs the Indian weeps and
sobs piteously, shedding real tears, and at the top of the
tree he leaves two branches and a top-knot, resembling
a man's head and outstretched arms. Having descended
from the tree, he binds the wood in a faggot and carries
it back to the assembly-room, blubbering all the way.
If he is asked why he thus weeps at cutting and fetching the
sacred fuel, he will either give no answer or say simply that
he does it for luck.<note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), p. 25.</note> We may suspect that his real motive
is to appease the wrath of the tree-spirit, many of whose
limbs he has amputated, though he took care to leave him
two arms and a head.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Arab
ceremony
of burying
<q>the old
man</q> at
harvest.</note>
The conception of the corn-spirit as old and dead at
harvest is very clearly embodied in a custom observed by
the Arabs of Moab. When the harvesters have nearly
finished their task and only a small corner of the field
remains to be reaped, the owner takes a handful of wheat
tied up in a sheaf. A hole is dug in the form of a grave,
and two stones are set upright, one at the head and the
other at the foot, just as in an ordinary burial. Then the
sheaf of wheat is laid at the bottom of the grave, and
the sheikh pronounces these words, <q>The old man is dead.</q>
Earth is afterwards thrown in to cover the sheaf, with a
prayer, <q>May Allah bring us back the wheat of the dead.</q><note place='foot'>A. Jaussen, <q>Coutumes Arabes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Revue Biblique</hi>, 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>er</hi> avril 1903, p. 258;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes des Arabes au pays de
Moab</hi> (Paris 1908), pp. 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Official Festivals of Osiris.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Festival at Sais.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Festival at Sais.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>With the
adoption
of the Alexandrian
year in
30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> the
Egyptian
festivals
ceased to
rotate
through
the natural
year.</note>
Such, then, were the principal events of the farmer's calendar
in ancient Egypt, and such the simple religious rites by
which he celebrated them. But we have still to consider
the Osirian festivals of the official calendar, so far as these
are described by Greek writers or recorded on the monuments.
In examining them it is necessary to bear in mind
that on account of the movable year of the old Egyptian
calendar the true or astronomical dates of the official festivals
must have varied from year to year, at least until the adoption
of the fixed Alexandrian year in 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> From that time
onward, apparently, the dates of the festivals were determined
by the new calendar, and so ceased to rotate
throughout the length of the solar year. At all events
Plutarch, writing about the end of the first century, implies
that they were then fixed, not movable; for though he
does not mention the Alexandrian calendar, he clearly dates
the festivals by it.<note place='foot'>Thus with regard to the Egyptian
month of Athyr he tells us that the sun
was then in the sign of the Scorpion
(<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 13), that Athyr corresponded
to the Athenian month
Pyanepsion and the Boeotian month
Damatrius (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 69), that it was the
month of sowing (<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>), that in it the
Nile sank, the earth was laid bare by
the retreat of the inundation, the leaves
fell, and the nights grew longer than
the days (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 39). These indications
agree on the whole with the date
of Athyr in the Alexandrian calendar,
namely October 28-November 26.
Again, he says (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 43) that the
festival of the beginning of spring was
held at the new moon of the month
Phamenoth, which, in the Alexandrian
calendar, corresponded to February 24-March
26. Further, he tells us that a
festival was celebrated on the 23rd of
Phaophi after the autumn equinox
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 52), and in the Alexandrian
calendar Phaophi began on September
28, a few days after the autumn equinox.
Once more, he observes that another
festival was held after the spring
equinox (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 65), which implies
the use of a fixed solar year. See
G. Parthey in his edition of Plutarch's
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi> (Berlin, 1850), pp. 165-169.</note> Moreover, the long festal calendar of
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Esne, an important document of the Imperial age, is obviously
based on the fixed Alexandrian year; for it assigns
the mark for New Year's Day to the day which corresponds
to the twenty-ninth of August, which was the first day of
the Alexandrian year, and its references to the rising of the
Nile, the position of the sun, and the operations of agriculture
are all in harmony with this supposition.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ägyptologie</hi>, p.
355.</note> Thus we
may take it as fairly certain that from 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> onwards the
Egyptian festivals were stationary in the solar year.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
sufferings
of Osiris
displayed
as a
mystery
at Sais. The
illumination
of
houses
throughout
Egypt on
the night
of the
festival
suggests
that the
rite was a
Feast of
All Souls.</note>
Herodotus tells us that the grave of Osiris was at Sais in
Lower Egypt, and that there was a lake there upon which the
sufferings of the god were displayed as a mystery by night.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 170.</note>
This commemoration of the divine passion was held once a
year: the people mourned and beat their breasts at it to testify
their sorrow for the death of the god; and an image of a cow,
made of gilt wood with a golden sun between its horns, was
carried out of the chamber in which it stood the rest of the
year.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 129-132.</note> The cow no doubt represented Isis herself, for cows
were sacred to her, and she was regularly depicted with the
horns of a cow on her head,<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 41, with Prof. A.
Wiedemann's note (<hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites
Buch</hi>, pp. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>); Diodorus
Siculus, i. 11. 4; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>De natura
animalium</hi>, x. 27; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, 19 and 39. According to
Prof. Wiedemann <q>the Egyptian
name of the cow of Isis was <foreign rend='italic'>ḥes-t</foreign>, and
this is one of the rare cases in which
the name of the sacred animal agrees
with that of the deity.</q> <foreign rend='italic'>Hest</foreign> was the
usual Egyptian form of the name
which the Greeks and Romans represented
as Isis. See R. V. Lanzone,
<hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di Mitologia Egizia</hi>, pp.
813 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> or even as a woman with the
head of a cow.<note place='foot'>In this form she is represented on
a relief at Philae pouring a libation in
honour of the soul of Osiris. See
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 8. She is
similarly portrayed in a bronze statuette,
which is now in the Louvre.
See G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</hi>, i. (Paris,
1882) p. 60, fig. 40.</note> It is probable that the carrying out of her cow-shaped
image symbolized the goddess searching for the dead
body of Osiris; for this was the native Egyptian interpretation
of a similar ceremony observed in Plutarch's time about the
winter solstice, when the gilt cow was carried seven times
round the temple.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 52. The
interpretation is accepted by Prof. A.
Wiedemann (<hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites Buch</hi>,
p. 482).</note> A great feature of the festival was the
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
nocturnal illumination. People fastened rows of oil-lamps
to the outside of their houses, and the lamps burned all
night long. The custom was not confined to Sais, but was
observed throughout the whole of Egypt.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 62. In one of the
Hibeh papyri (No. 27, lines 165-167)
mention is made of the festival and of
the lights which were burned throughout
the district. See <hi rend='italic'>The Hibeh Papyri</hi>,
part i., ed. B. P. Grenfell and A. S.
Hunt (London, 1906), p. 149 (pointed
out to me by Mr. W. Wyse). In
the papyrus the festival is said to have
been held in honour of Athena (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
Neith), the great goddess of Sais, who
was there identified with Isis. See
A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten
Ägypter</hi>, pp. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of
the Ancient Egyptians</hi>, pp. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
This universal illumination of the houses on one night
of the year suggests that the festival may have been a commemoration
not merely of the dead Osiris but of the dead
in general, in other words, that it may have been a night of
All Souls.<note place='foot'>In the period of the Middle Kingdom
the Egyptians of Siut used to
light lamps for the dead on the last
day and the first day of the year. See
A. Erman, <q>Zehn Vorträge aus dem
mittleren Reich,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für ägyptische
Sprache und Alterthumskunde</hi>,
xx. (1882) p. 164; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und
aegyptisches Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp.
434 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> For it is a widespread belief that the souls of
the dead revisit their old homes on one night of the year;
and on that solemn occasion people prepare for the reception
of the ghosts by laying out food for them to eat, and
lighting lamps to guide them on their dark road from and to
the grave. The following instances will illustrate the custom.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Feasts of All Souls.'/>
<head>§ 2. Feasts of All Souls.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead
among
the Esquimaux.
The lighting
of the
lamps for
the dead. Annual
festivals
of the dead
among the
Indians of
California.
Annual
festivals of
the dead
among the
Choctaws
and Pueblo
Indians.</note>
The Esquimaux of St. Michael and the lower Yukon
River in Alaska hold a festival of the dead every year at
the end of November or the beginning of December, as
well as a greater festival at intervals of several years. At
these seasons, food, drink, and clothes are provided for the
returning ghosts in the <foreign rend='italic'>kashim</foreign> or clubhouse of the village,
which is illuminated with oil lamps. Every man or
woman who wishes to honour a dead friend sets up a lamp
on a stand in front of the place which the deceased used to
occupy in the clubhouse. These lamps, filled with seal oil,
are kept burning day and night till the festival is over.
They are believed to light the shades on their return to
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
their old home and back again to the land of the dead. If
any one fails to put up a lamp in the clubhouse and to keep
it burning, the shade whom he or she desires to honour
could not find its way to the place and so would miss the
feast. On the eve of the festival the nearest male relation
goes to the grave and summons the ghost by planting there
a small model of a seal spear or of a wooden dish, according
as the deceased was a man or a woman. The badges
of the dead are marked on these implements. When all is
ready, the ghosts gather in the fire-pit under the clubhouse,
and ascending through the floor at the proper moment take
possession of the bodies of their namesakes, to whom the
offerings of food, drink, and clothing are made for the benefit
of the dead. Thus each shade obtains the supplies he needs
in the other world. The dead who have none to make
offerings to them are believed to suffer great destitution.
Hence the Esquimaux fear to die without leaving behind
them some one who will sacrifice to their spirits, and childless
people generally adopt children lest their shades should
be forgotten at the festivals. When a person has been
much disliked, his ghost is sometimes purposely ignored,
and that is deemed the severest punishment that could be
inflicted upon him. After the songs of invitation to the
dead have been sung, the givers of the feast take a small
portion of food from every dish and cast it down as an
offering to the shades; then each pours a little water on
the floor so that it runs through the cracks. In this way
they believe that the spiritual essence of all the food and
water is conveyed to the souls. The remainder of the food
is afterwards distributed among the people present, who eat
of it heartily. Then with songs and dances the feast comes
to an end, and the ghosts are dismissed to their own place.
Dances form a conspicuous feature of the great festival of the
dead, which is held every few years. The dancers dance not
only in the clubhouse but also at the graves and on the ice,
if the deceased met their death by drowning.<note place='foot'>E. W. Nelson, <q>The Eskimo about
Bering Strait,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eighteenth Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>,
Part i. (Washington, 1899) pp. 363
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The Indians of California used to observe annual ceremonies
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
of mourning for the dead,<note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>
(Washington, 1877), pp. 328, 355,
356, 384.</note> at some of which the souls
of the departed were represented by living persons. Ten
or more men would prepare themselves to play the part of
the ghosts by fasting for several days, especially by abstaining
from flesh. Disguised with paint and soot, adorned with
feathers and grasses, they danced and sang in the village or
rushed about in the forest by night with burning torches in
their hands. After a time they presented themselves to the
relations of the deceased, who looked upon these maskers
as in very truth their departed friends and received them
accordingly with an outburst of lamentation, the old women
scratching their own faces and smiting their breasts with
stones in token of mourning. These masquerades were
generally held in February. During their continuance a
strict fast was observed in the village.<note place='foot'>Kostromitonow, <q>Bemerkungen
über die Indianer in Ober-Kalifornien,</q>
in K. F. v. Baer and Gr. v. Helmersen's
<hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss des russischen
Reiches</hi>, i. (St. Petersburg, 1839)
pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The natives of the western
islands of Torres Straits used to hold a
great death-dance at which disguised
men personated the ghosts of the lately
deceased, mimicking their characteristic
gait and gestures. Women and
children were supposed to take these
mummers for real ghosts. See A. C.
Haddon, in <hi rend='italic'>Reports of the Cambridge
Anthropological Expedition to Torres
Straits</hi>, v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 252-256;
<hi rend='italic'>The Belief in Immortality and
the Worship of the Dead</hi>, i. 176 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Among the Konkaus
of California the dance of the dead is always held about the
end of August and marks their New Year's Day. They
collect a large quantity of food, clothing, baskets, ornaments,
and whatever else the spirits are supposed to need in the
other world. These they hang on a semicircle of boughs or
small trees, cut and set in the ground leafless. In the
centre burns a great fire, and hard by are the graves. The
ceremony begins at evening and lasts till daybreak. As
darkness falls, men and women sit on the graves and wail for
the dead of the year. Then they dance round the fire with
frenzied yells and whoops, casting from time to time the
offerings into the flames. All must be consumed before the
first faint streaks of dawn glimmer in the East.<note place='foot'>S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>,
pp. 437 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
Choctaws used to have a great respect for their dead. They
did not bury their bodies but laid them on biers made of
bark and supported by forked sticks about fifteen feet high.
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
When the worms had consumed the flesh, the skeleton was
dismembered, any remains of muscles and sinews were
buried, and the bones were deposited in a box, the skull
being reddened with ochre. The box containing the bones
was then carried to the common burial ground. In the
early days of November the tribe celebrated a great festival
which they called the Festival of the Dead or of the Souls;
every family then gathered in the common burial ground,
and there with weeping and lamentation visited the boxes
which contained the mouldering relics of their dead. On
returning from the graveyard they held a great banquet,
which ended the festival.<note place='foot'>Bossu, <hi rend='italic'>Nouveaux Voyages aux
Indes Occidentales</hi> (Paris, 1768), ii.
95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Some of the Pueblo Indians
of New Mexico <q>believe that on a certain day (in August,
I think) the dead rise from their graves and flit about the
neighbouring hills, and on that day all who have lost friends
carry out quantities of corn, bread, meat, and such other good
things of this life as they can obtain, and place them in the
haunts frequented by the dead, in order that the departed
spirits may once more enjoy the comforts of this nether
world. They have been encouraged in this belief by the
priests, who were in the habit of sending out and appropriating
to themselves all these things, and then making the
poor simple Indians believe that the dead had eaten
them.</q><note place='foot'>T. G. S. Ten Broeck, in H. R.
Schoolcraft's <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes of the
United States</hi> (Philadelphia, 1853-1856),
iv. 78. The Pueblo village to
which the writer particularly refers is
Laguna.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival
of the dead
among the
Miztecs of
Mexico.</note>
The Miztecs of Mexico believed that the souls of the
dead came back in the twelfth month of every year, which
corresponded to our November. On this day of All Souls
the houses were decked out to welcome the spirits. Jars of
food and drink were set on a table in the principal room,
and the family went forth with torches to meet the ghosts
and invite them to enter. Then returning themselves to the
house they knelt around the table, and with eyes bent on
the ground prayed the souls to accept of the offerings and
to procure the blessings of the gods upon the family. Thus
they remained on bended knees and with downcast eyes till
the morning, not daring to look at the table lest they
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
should offend the spirits by spying on them at their meal.
With the first beams of the sun they rose, glad at heart.
The jars of food which had been presented to the dead were
given to the poor or deposited in a secret place.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique-Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-1859),
iii. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H. Bancroft,
<hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>
(London, 1875-1876), ii. 623. Similar
customs are still practised by the
Indians of a great part of Mexico and
Central America (Brasseur de Bourbourg,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 24, note <hi rend='vertical-align: super'>1</hi>).</note> The
Indians of Santiago Tepehuacan believe that the souls of
their dead return to them on the night of the eighteenth of
October, the festival of St. Luke, and they sweep the roads
in order that the ghosts may find them clean on their
passage.<note place='foot'><q>Lettre du curé de Santiago
Tepehuacan àson évêque,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de
la Société de Géographie</hi> (Paris), II<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi>
Série, ii. (1834) p. 179.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead
in Sumba.</note>
Again, the natives of Sumba, an East Indian island,
celebrate a New Year's festival, which is at the same time a
festival of the dead. The graves are in the middle of the
village, and at a given moment all the people repair to them
and raise a loud weeping and wailing. Then after indulging
for a short time in the national pastimes they disperse to
their houses, and every family calls upon its dead to come
back. The ghosts are believed to hear and accept the
invitation. Accordingly betel and areca nuts are set out
for them. Victims, too, are sacrificed in front of every
house, and their hearts and livers are offered with rice to
the dead. After a decent interval these portions are distributed
amongst the living, who consume them and banquet
gaily on flesh and rice, a rare event in their frugal lives.
Then they play, dance, and sing to their heart's content, and
the festival which began so lugubriously ends by being the
merriest of the year. A little before daybreak the invisible
guests take their departure. All the people turn out of
their houses to escort them a little way. Holding in one
hand the half of a coco-nut, which contains a small packet
of provisions for the dead, and in the other hand a piece of
smouldering wood, they march in procession, singing a
drawling song to the accompaniment of a gong and waving
the lighted brands in time to the music. So they move
through the darkness till with the last words of the song
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
they throw away the coco-nuts and the brands in the
direction of the spirit-land, leaving the ghosts to wend
their way thither, while they themselves return to the
village.<note place='foot'>S. Roos, <q>Bijdrage tot de kennis
van taal, land en volk op het eiland
Soemba,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten
en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxxvi. (1872) pp.
63-65.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead in
Kiriwina.
Festival of
the dead
among the
Sea Dyaks
of Borneo.</note>
In Kiriwina, one of the Trobriand Islands, to the east
of New Guinea, the spirits of the ancestors are believed
to revisit their native village in a body once a year after
the harvest has been got in. At this time the men perform
special dances, the people openly display their valuables,
spread out on platforms, and great feasts are made for
the spirits. On a certain night, when the moon is at the
full, all the people raise a great shout and so drive away
the spirits to the spirit land.<note place='foot'>Rev. S. B. Fellows, quoted by
George Brown, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians
and Polynesians</hi> (London, 1910), p.
237.</note> The Sea Dyaks of Borneo
celebrate a great festival in honour of the dead at irregular
intervals, it may be one or more years after the death
of a particular person. All who have died since the last
feast was held, and have not yet been honoured by such
a celebration, are remembered at this time; hence the
number of persons commemorated may be great, especially
if many years have elapsed since the last commemoration
service. The preparations last many weeks: food and
drink and all other necessaries are stored in plenty, and
the whole neighbourhood for miles round is invited to
attend. On the eve of the feast the women take bamboo
splints and fashion out of them little models of various
useful articles, and these models are hung over the graves
for the use of the dead in the other world. If the feast
is held in honour of a man, the things manufactured in
his behoof will take the form of a bamboo gun, a shield,
a war-cap, and so on; if it is a woman who is commemorated,
little models of a loom, a fish-basket, a winnowing-fan
and such like things will be provided for her spirit; and
if it is a child for whom the rite is performed, toys of
various kinds will be made ready for the childish ghost.
Finally, to stay the appetite of ghosts who may be too
sharp-set to wait for the formal banquet in the house,
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
a supply of victuals is very considerately placed outside
the house on which the hungry spirits may fall to without
delay. The dead arrive in a boat from the other world;
for living Dyaks generally travel by river, from which it
necessarily follows that Dyak ghosts do so likewise. The
ship in which the ghostly visitors voyage to the land of the
living is not much to look at, being in appearance nothing
but a tiny boat made out of a bamboo which has been used
to cook rice. Even this is not set floating on the river
but is simply thrown away under the house. Yet through
the incantations uttered by the professional wailing-woman
the bark is wafted away to the spirit world and is there
converted into a large war-canoe. Gladly the ghosts
embark and sail away as soon as the final summons comes.
It always comes in the evening, for it is then that the wailer
begins to croon her mournful ditties; but the way is so long
that the spirits do not arrive in the house till the day is
breaking. To refresh them after their weary journey a
bamboo full of rice-spirit awaits them; and this they partake
of by deputy, for a brave old man, who does not fear
the face of ghosts, quaffs the beverage in their stead amid
the joyful shouts of the spectators. On the morning after
the feast the living pay the last offices of respect to the
dead. Monuments made of ironwood, the little bamboo
articles, and food of all kinds are set upon the graves.
In consideration of these gifts the ghosts now relinquish
all claims on their surviving relatives, and henceforth earn
their own living by the sweat of their brow. Before they
take their final departure they come to eat and drink in the
house for the last time.<note place='foot'>E. H. Gomes, <hi rend='italic'>Seventeen Years
among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo</hi> (London,
1911), pp. 216-218. For another
and briefer account of this festival see
<hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi>, p. 154.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead
among the
Nagas of
Manipur.</note>
Thus the Dyak festival of the dead is not an annual
welcome accorded to all the souls of ancestors; it is a
propitiatory ceremony designed to secure once for all the
eternal welfare of the recently departed, or at least to prevent
their ghosts from returning to infest and importune
the living. The same is perhaps the intention of the <q>soul
departure</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Kathi Kasham</foreign>) festival which the Tangkul
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
Nagas of Manipur, in Assam, celebrate every year about
the end of January. At this great feast the dead are
represented by living men, chosen on the ground of their
likeness to the departed, who are decked with ornaments
and treated as if they were in truth the deceased persons
come to life again. In that character they dance together
in the large open space of the village, they are fed by the
female relations, and they go from house to house, receiving
presents of cloth. The festival lasts ten days, but the great
day is the ninth. Huge torches of pinewood are made
ready to be used that evening when darkness has fallen.
The time of departure of the dead is at hand. Their living
representatives are treated to a last meal in the houses,
and they distribute farewell presents to the sorrowing kinsfolk,
who have come to bid them good-bye. When the sun
has set, a procession is formed. At the head of it march
men holding aloft the flaring, sputtering torches. Then
follow the elders armed and in martial array, and behind
them stalk the representatives of the dead, with the relations
of the departed crowding and trooping about them. Slowly
and mournfully the sad procession moves, with loud lamentations,
through the darkness to a spot at the north end of
the village which is overshadowed by a great tree. The
light of the torches is to guide the souls of the dead to their
place of rest; the warlike array of the elders is to guard
them from the perils and dangers of the way. At the
village boundary the procession stops and the torch-bearers
throw down their torches. At the same moment the spirits
of the dead are believed to pass into the dying flambeaux
and in that guise to depart to the far country. There is
therefore no further need for their living representatives,
who are accordingly stripped of all their finery on the spot.
When the people return home, each family is careful to
light a pine torch and set it burning on a stone in the house
just inside the front door; this they do as a precaution
to prevent their own souls from following the spirits of the
dead to the other world. The expense of thus despatching
the dead to their long home is very great; when the head
of a family dies, debts may be incurred and rice-fields
and houses sold to defray the cost of carriage. Thus
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
the living impoverish themselves in order to enrich the
dead.<note place='foot'>Rev. Wm. Pettigrew, <q>Kathi
Kasham, the <q>Soul Departure</q> feast
as practised by the Tangkkul Nagas,
Manipur, Assam,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal and Proceedings
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>,
N.S. vol. v. 1909 (Calcutta,
1910), pp. 37-46; T. C. Hodson,
<hi rend='italic'>The Naga Tribes of Manipur</hi> (London,
1911), pp. 153-158.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead
among the
Oraons of
Bengal.</note>
The Oraons or Uraons of Bengal feast their dead every
year on a day in January. This ceremony is called the
Great Marriage, because by it the bones of the deceased
are believed to be mysteriously reunited to each other. The
Oraons treat the bones of the dead differently according to
the dates of their death in the agricultural year. The bones
of those who died before the seeds have sprouted in the
fields are burnt, and the few charred bones which have not
been reduced to ashes are gathered in an earthen pot.
With the bones in the pot are placed offerings of rice,
native gin, and money, and then they carry the urn to
the river, where the bones of their forefathers repose. But
the bones of all who die after the seeds have sprung up
and before the end of harvest may not be taken to the
river, because the people believe that were that to be done
the crops would suffer. These bones are therefore put
away in a pot under a stone near the house till the harvest
is over. Then on the appointed day in January they are
all collected. A banquet is given in honour of the dead, and
then both men and women form a procession to accompany
the bones to their last resting-place in the sands of the river.
But first the relics of mortality are carried from house to
house in the village, and each family pours rice and gin into
the urn which contains the bones of its dead. Then the procession
sets out for the river, men and women dancing,
singing, beating drums, and weeping, while the earthen pots
containing the bones are passed from hand to hand and
dance with the jigging steps of the dancers. When they
are yet some way from the spot, the bearers of the urns run
forward and bury them in the sand of the river. When the
rest come up, they all bathe and the Great Marriage is over.<note place='foot'>Rev. P. Dehon, S.J., <q>Religion
and Customs of the Uraons,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, vol. i.
No. 9 (Calcutta, 1906), p. 136. Compare
Rev. F. Hahn, <q>Some Notes on
the Religion and Superstition of the
Orāōs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic Society of
Bengal</hi>, lxxii. Part iii. (Calcutta, 1904)
pp. 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According to the latter
writer the pots containing the relics
of the dead are buried, not in the sand
of the river, but in a pit, generally
covered with huge stones, which is dug
for the purpose in some field or grove.</note>
</p>

<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead in
Bilaspore.</note>
In the Bilaspore district of the Central Provinces, India,
<q>the festival known as the Fortnight of the Manes&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Pitr
Pāk</foreign>&mdash;occurs about September. It is believed that during
this fortnight it is the practice of all the departed to come
and visit their relatives. The homes are therefore cleaned,
and the spaces in front of the house are plastered and painted
in order to be pleasing to those who are expected. It is
believed that the departed will return on the very date on
which they went away. A father who left on the fourth,
be it the fourth of the dark half or the light half of the
moon, will return to visit his family on the fourth of the
Fortnight of the Manes. On that day cakes are prepared,
and with certain ceremony these are offered to the unseen
hovering spirit. Their implicit belief is that the spirit will
partake of the essence of the food, and that which remains&mdash;the
material portion&mdash;may be eaten by members of the
family. The souls of women, it is said, will all come on the
ninth of the fortnight. On the thirteenth come those who
have met with a violent death and who lost their lives by a
fall, by snake-bite, or any other unusual cause. During the
Fortnight of the Manes a woman is not supposed to put on
new bangles and a man is not permitted to shave. In
short, this is a season of sad remembrances, an annual
festival for the departed.</q><note place='foot'>E. M. Gordon, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Folk Tales</hi>
(London, 1908), p. 18. According to
Mr. W. Crooke, the Hindoo Feast of
Lamps (<foreign rend='italic'>Diwálî</foreign>) seems to have been
based on <q>the idea that on this night
the spirits of the dead revisit their
homes, which are cleaned and lighted
for their reception.</q> See W. Crooke,
<hi rend='italic'>The Popular Religion and Folk-lore of
Northern India</hi> (Westminster, 1896),
ii. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead
among the
Bghais and
Hkamies.</note>
The Bghais, a Karen tribe of Burma, hold an annual
feast for the dead at the new moon which falls near the end
of August or the beginning of September. All the villagers
who have lost relatives within the last three years take part
in it. Food and drink are set out on tables for the ghosts,
and new clothes for them are hung up in the room. All
being ready, the people beat gongs and begin to weep.
Each one calls upon the relation whom he has lost to come
and eat. When the dead are thought to have arrived, the
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
living address them, saying, <q>You have come to me, you
have returned to me. It has been raining hard, and you
must be wet. Dress yourselves, clothe yourselves with these
new garments, and all the companions that are with you.
Eat betel together with all that accompany you, all your
friends and associates, and the long dead. Call them all to
eat and drink.</q> The ghosts having finished their repast,
the people dry their tears and sit down to eat what is left.
More food is then prepared and put into a basket, and at
cock-crow next morning the contents of the basket are
thrown out of the house, while the living weep and call
upon their dead as before.<note place='foot'>Rev. F. Mason, D.D., <q>Physical
Character of the Karens,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>, 1866, Part
ii. pp. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Lights are not mentioned
by the writer, but the festival
being nocturnal we may assume that
they are used for the convenience of
the living as well as of the dead. In
other respects the ceremonies are
typical.</note> The Hkamies, a hill tribe of
North Aracan, hold an important festival every year in
honour of departed spirits. It falls after harvest and is
called <q>the opening of the house of the dead.</q> When a
person dies and has been burnt, the ashes are collected and
placed in a small house in the forest together with his spear
or gun, which has first been broken. These little huts are
generally arranged in groups near a village, and are sometimes
large enough to be mistaken for one. After harvest
all the relations of the deceased cook various kinds of food
and take them with pots of liquor distilled from rice to the
village of the dead. There they open the doors of the
houses, and having placed the food and drink inside they
shut them again. After that they weep, eat, drink, and
return home.<note place='foot'>R. F. St. Andrew St. John, <q>A
Short Account of the Hill Tribes of
North Aracan,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, ii. (1873) p. 238.
At this festival the dead are apparently
not supposed to return to the houses.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead in
Cambodia.</note>
The great festival of the dead in Cambodia takes place
on the last day of the month Phatrabot (September-October),
but ever since the moon began to wane everybody has been
busy preparing for it. In every house cakes and sweetmeats
are set out, candles burn, incense sticks smoke, and
the whole is offered to the ancestral shades with an invocation
which is thrice repeated: <q>O all you our ancestors who
are departed, deign to come and eat what we have prepared
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
for you, and to bless your posterity and make it happy.</q>
Fifteen days afterwards many little boats are made of bark
and filled with rice, cakes, small coins, smoking incense
sticks, and lighted candles. At evening these are set floating
on the river, and the souls of the dead embark in them
to return to their own place. The living now bid them
farewell. <q>Go to the lands,</q> they say, <q>go to the fields
you inhabit, to the mountains, under the stones which are
your abodes. Go away! return! In due time your sons
and your grandsons will think of you. Then you will
return, you will return, you will return.</q> The river is now
covered with twinkling points of fire. But the current soon
bears them away, and as they vanish one by one in the
darkness the souls depart with them to the far country.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notice sur le Cambodge</hi>
(Paris, 1875), p. 59; A. Leclère,
<hi rend='italic'>Le Buddhisme au Cambodge</hi> (Paris,
1899), pp. 374-376. The departure
of the souls is described only by the
latter writer. Compare E. Aymonier,
<q>Notes sur les coutumes et croyances
superstitieuses des Cambodgiens,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine Française, Excursions et
Reconnaissances</hi>, No. 16 (Saigon,
1883), pp. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Tonquin, as in Sumba, the dead revisit their kinsfolk
and their old homes at the New Year. From the hour of
midnight, when the New Year begins, no one dares to shut
the door of his house for fear of excluding the ghosts, who
begin to arrive at that time. Preparations have been made
to welcome and refresh them after their long journey. Beds
and mats are ready for their weary bodies to repose upon,
water to wash their dusty feet, slippers to comfort them, and
canes to support their feeble steps. Candles burn on the
domestic altar, and pastilles diffuse a fragrant odour. The
people bow before the unseen visitors and beseech them to
remember and bless their descendants in the coming year.
Having discharged this pious duty they abstain from sweeping
the houses for three days lest the dust should incommode
the ghosts.<note place='foot'>Mariny, <hi rend='italic'>Relation nouvelle et curieuse
des royaumes de Tunquin et de
Lao</hi> (Paris, 1666), pp. 251-253.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
the dead in
Annam.</note>
In Annam one of the most important festivals of the
year is the festival of Têt, which falls on the first three days
of the New Year. It is devoted to the worship of ancestors.
Everybody, even the poorest, must provide a good meal for
the souls of his dead at this time and must himself eat and
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
drink heartily. Some families, in order to discharge this
pious duty, run into debt for the whole year. In the houses
everything is put in order, washed, and scoured for the
reception of the dear and distinguished guests. A tall
bamboo pole is set up in the front of every house and allowed
to stand there for seven days. A small basket containing
areca, betel, and leaves of gilt paper is fastened to the pole.
The erection of the pole is a sacred rite which no family
omits to perform, though why they do so few people can
say. Some, however, allege that the posts are intended to
guide the ancestral spirits to their old homes. The ceremony
of the reception of the shades takes place at nightfall
on the last day of the year. The house of the head
of the family is then decked with flowers, and in the room
which serves as a domestic chapel the altar of the ancestors
is surrounded with flowers, among which the lotus, the
emblem of immortality, is most conspicuous. On a table
are set red candles, perfumes, incense, sandal-wood, and
plates full of bananas, oranges, and other fruits. The
relations crouch before the altar, and kneeling at the foot
of it the head of the house invokes the name of the family
which he represents. Then in solemn tones he recites an
incantation, mentioning the names of his most illustrious
ancestors and marking time with the strokes of a hammer
upon a gong, while crackers are exploded outside the
room. After that, he implores the ancestral shades to
protect their descendants and invites them to a repast,
which is spread for them on a table. Round this table he
walks, serving the invisible guests with his own hands. He
distributes to them smoking balls of rice in little china
saucers, and pours tea or spirits into each little cup, while
he murmurs words of invitation and compliment. When
the ghosts have eaten and drunk their fill, the head of the
family returns to the altar and salutes them for the last
time. Finally, he takes leaves of yellow paper, covered
with gold and silver spangles, and throws them into a
brazier placed at the foot of the ancestral tablets. These
papers represent imaginary bars of gold and silver which
the living send to the dead. Cardboard models of houses,
furniture, jewels, clothes, of everything in short that the
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
ghosts can need in the other world, are despatched to
them in like manner in the flames. Then the family sits
down to table and feasts on the remains of the ghostly
banquet.<note place='foot'>Le R. P. Cadière, <q>Coutumes
populaires de la vallée du Nguôn-So'n,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de l'École Française d'Extrême-Orient</hi>,
ii. (Hanoi, 1902) pp. 376-379;
P. d'Enjoy, <q>Du droit successoral en
Annam,</q> etc., <hi rend='italic'>Bulletins de la Société
d'Anthropologie de Paris</hi>, V<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>e</hi> Série, iv.
(1903) pp. 500-502; E. Diguet, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Annamites</hi> (Paris, 1906), pp. 372-375.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festival of
friendless
ghosts in
Annam.</note>
But in Annam it is not merely the spirits of ancestors
who are thus feasted and supplied with all the necessaries of
life. The poor ghosts of those who died without leaving
descendants or whose bodies were left unburied are not
forgotten by the pious Annamites. But these spirits come
round at a different time of year from the others. The
seventh month of the year is set apart for expiatory sacrifices
destined to benefit these unhappy beings, and that
is why in Annam nobody should marry or be betrothed in
that month. The great day of the month is the fifteenth,
which is called the Festival of the Souls. On that day the
ghosts in question are set free by the lord of the underworld,
and they come prowling about among the living. They
are exceedingly dangerous, especially to children. Hence in
order to appease their wrath and prevent them from entering
the houses every family takes care to put out offerings for
them in the street. Before every house on that night you
may see candles lighted, paper garments of many colours,
paper hats, paper boots, paper furniture, ingots of gold and
silver paper, all hanging in tempting array from a string,
while plates of food and cups of tea and rice-spirit stand
ready for the use of hungry and thirsty souls. The theory
is that the ghosts will be so busy consuming the victuals,
appropriating the deceitful riches, and trying on the paper
coats, hats, and boots that they will have neither the leisure
nor the inclination to intrude upon the domestic circle
indoors. At seven o'clock in the evening fire is put to the
offerings, and the paper wardrobe, furniture, and money soon
vanish crackling in the flames. At the same moment,
peeping in at a door or window, you may see the domestic
ancestral altar brilliantly illuminated. As for the food, it is
supposed to be thrown on the fire or on the ground for the
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
use of the ghosts, but practically it is eaten by vagabonds and
beggars, who scuffle for the booty.<note place='foot'>E. Diguet, <hi rend='italic'>Les Annamites</hi> (Paris,
1906), pp. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Paul Giran, <hi rend='italic'>Magie
et Religion Annamites</hi> (Paris, 1912),
pp. 258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> According to the latter
writer the offerings to the vagrant souls
are made on the first and last days of
the month, while sacrifices of a more
domestic character are performed on
the fifteenth.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festivals of
the dead in
Cochinchina,
Siam and
Japan.</note>
In Cochinchina the ancestral spirits are similarly propitiated
and fed on the first day of the New Year. The
tablets which represent them are placed on the domestic
altar, and the family prostrate themselves before these
emblems of the departed. The head of the family lights
sticks of incense on the altar and prays the shades of his
forefathers to accept the offerings and be favourable to their
descendants. With great gravity he waits upon the ghosts,
passing dishes of food before the ancestral tablets and pouring
out wine and tea to slake the thirst of the spirits. When
the dead are supposed to be satisfied with the shadowy
essence of the food, the living partake of its gross material
substance.<note place='foot'>L. E. Louvet, <hi rend='italic'>La Cochinchine
religieuse</hi> (Paris, 1885), pp. 149-151.</note> In Siam and Japan also the souls of the dead
revisit their families for three days in every year, and the
lamps which the Japanese kindle in multitudes on that
occasion to light the spirits on their way have procured
for the festival the name of the Feast of Lanterns.
It is to be observed that in Siam, as in Tonquin and
Sumba, the return of the ghosts takes place at the New
Year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi>, pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festivals of
the dead
among the
Chewsurs
and
Armenians.</note>
The Chewsurs of the Caucasus believe that the souls of
the departed revisit their old homes on the Saturday night
of the second week in Lent. This gathering of the dead
is called the <q>Assembly of Souls.</q> The people spare no
expense to treat the unseen guests handsomely. Beer is
brewed and loaves of various shapes baked specially for the
occasion.<note place='foot'>C. v. Hahn, <q>Religiöse Anschauungen
und Totengedächtnisfeier
der Chewsuren,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxvi. (1899)
pp. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Armenians celebrate the memory of the
dead on many days of the year, burning incense and
lighting tapers in their honour. One of their customs is to
keep a <q>light of the dead</q> burning all night in the house
in order that the ghosts may be able to enter. For if the
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
spirits find the house dark, they spit down the chimney and
depart, cursing the churlish inmates.<note place='foot'>M. Abeghian, <hi rend='italic'>Der armenische
Volksglaube</hi> (Leipsic, 1899), pp. 23
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festivals of
the dead
in Africa.</note>
Early in April every year the Dahomans of West Africa
<q>set a table, as they term it, and invite friends to eat with
the deceased relatives, whose spirits are supposed to move
round and partake of the good things of this life. Even my
interpreter, Madi-Ki Lemon, who pretends to despise the
belief in fetish, sets a table to his ancestors, and will tell you
that his grand- or great-grandfather, Corporal Lemon, makes
a meal on this occasion which will last him till the next
annual feast.</q><note place='foot'>Fred. E. Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>Dahomey and
the Dahomans</hi> (London, 1851), ii. 73.
Compare John Duncan, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in
Western Africa</hi> (London, 1847), i.
125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast</hi> (London,
1890), p. 108. The Tshi-speaking
peoples of the Gold Coast and Ashantee
celebrate an annual festival of eight
days in honour of the dead. It falls
towards the end of August. The offerings
are presented to the departed at
their graves. See A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The
Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</hi>
(London, 1887), pp. 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Perregaux,
<hi rend='italic'>Chez les Achanti</hi> (Neuchâtel,
1908), pp. 136, 138. According to
the latter writer the festival is celebrated
at the time of the yam harvest.</note> The Barea and apparently the Kunama, two
heathen tribes who lead a settled agricultural life to the
north of Abyssinia, celebrate every year a festival in the
month of November. It is a festival of thanksgiving for the
completion of the harvest, and at the same time a commemoration
and propitiation of the dead. Every house
prepares much beer for the occasion, and a small pot of
beer is set out for each deceased member of the household.
After standing for two days in the house the beer which
was devoted to the dead is drunk by the living. At these
festivals all the people of a district meet in a special place,
and there pass the time in games and dances. Among the
Barea the festive gatherings are held in a sacred grove.
We are told that <q>he who owes another a drubbing on this
day can pay his debt with impunity; for it is a day of
peace when all feuds are in abeyance.</q> Wild honey may
not be gathered till the festival has been held.<note place='foot'>W. Munzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Ostafrikanische
Studien</hi> (Schaffhausen, 1864), p. 473.</note> Apparently
the festival is a sort of Saturnalia, such as is celebrated
elsewhere at the end of harvest.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi>, pp. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At that season there is
food and to spare for the dead as well as the living.
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festivals of
the dead
among
peoples of
the Aryan
stock.
Annual
festival of
the dead
(the Fravashis)
among
the old
Iranians. Annual
festival of
the dead
among the
Persians.</note>
Among peoples of the Aryan stock, so far back as we
can trace their history, the worship and propitiation of the
dead seem to have formed a principal element of the popular
religion;<note place='foot'>On the worship of the dead, and
especially of ancestors, among Aryan
peoples, see W. Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Über Totenverehrung
bei einigen der indo-germanischen
Völker</hi> (Amsterdam, 1888); O.
Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen
Altertumskunde</hi> (Strasburg,
1901), pp. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Aryan
Religion,</q> in Dr. J. Hastings's <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
of Religion and Ethics</hi>, ii.
(Edinburgh, 1909) pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and like so many other races they appear to have
believed that once a year the souls of their departed kinsfolk
revisited their old homes and expected to be refreshed with
abundance of good cheer by their surviving relations. This
belief gave rise to the custom of celebrating an annual Feast
of All Souls, which has come down to us from a dateless
antiquity and is still observed year by year, with rites of
primitive simplicity, in some parts of Europe. Such a
festival was held every year in spring by the old Iranians.
The celebration fell at the end of the year and lasted ten
days, namely the last five days of the last month and the five
following supplementary days, which were regularly inserted
to make up a year of three hundred and sixty-five days; for
the old Iranian, like the old Egyptian, year was a vague year
of twelve months of thirty days each, with five supplementary
days added at the end for the sake of bringing it into
apparent, though not real, harmony with the sun's annual
course in the sky. According to one calculation the ten
days of the festival corresponded to the last days of
February, but according to another they fell in March; in
later ages the Parsees assigned them to the time of the
spring equinox. The name of the festival was Hamaspathmaedaya.<note place='foot'>As to the Iranian calendar see
W. Geiger, <hi rend='italic'>Altiranische Kultur im
Altertum</hi> (Erlangen, 1882), pp. 314
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; as to the Iranian worship of the
sainted dead (the Fravashis) see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>
pp. 286 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> As to the annual festival
of the dead (Hamaspathmaedaya) see
W. Caland, <hi rend='italic'>Über Totenverehrung bei
einigen der indo-germanischen Völker</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1888), pp. 64 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; N.
Söderblom, <hi rend='italic'>Les Fravashis</hi> (Paris,
1899), pp. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. H. Moulton,
<hi rend='italic'>Early Zoroastrianism</hi> (London, 1913),
pp. 256 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> All these writers agree
that the Fravashis of the <hi rend='italic'>Zend-Avesta</hi>
were originally the souls of the dead.
See also James Darmesteter, <hi rend='italic'>Zend-Avesta</hi>,
Part ii. (Oxford, 1883) p. 179:
<q>The Fravashi is the inner power in
every being that maintains it and makes
it grow and subsist. Originally the
Fravashis were the same as the <foreign rend='italic'>Pitris</foreign>
of the Hindus or the <foreign rend='italic'>Manes</foreign> of the
Latins, that is to say, the everlasting
and deified souls of the dead; but in
course of time they gained a wider
domain, and not only men, but gods
and even physical objects, like the
sky and the earth, etc., had each a
Fravashi.</q> Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ormazd et
Ahriman</hi> (Paris, 1877), pp. 130 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
N. Söderblom, <hi rend='italic'>La Vie Future d'après
Le Mazdéisme</hi> (Paris, 1901), pp. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
A different view of the original nature
of the Fravashis was taken by C. P.
Tiele, according to whom they were
essentially guardian spirits. See C. P.
Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</hi>
(Gotha, 1896-1903), ii. 256 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
From a passage in the <hi rend='italic'>Zend-Avesta</hi>, the
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
ancient sacred book of the Iranians, we learn that on the
ten nights of the festival the souls of the dead (the Fravashis)
were believed to go about the village asking the people to
do them reverence, to pray to them, to meditate on them,
and to furnish them with meat and clothes, while at the
same time they promised that blessings should rest on the
pious householder who complied with their request.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Zend-Avesta</hi>, translated by
James Darmesteter, Part ii. (Oxford,
1883) pp. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sacred Books of the
East</hi>, vol. xxiii.).</note> The
Arab geographer Albiruni, who flourished about the year
one thousand of our era, tells us that among the Persians of
his time the last five days of the month Aban were called
Farwardajan. <q>During this time,</q> he says, <q>people put
food in the halls of the dead and drink on the roofs of the
houses, believing that the spirits of their dead during these
days come out from the places of their reward or their
punishment, that they go to the dishes laid out for them,
imbibe their strength and suck their taste. They fumigate
their houses with juniper, that the dead may enjoy its smell.
The spirits of the pious men dwell among their families,
children, and relations, and occupy themselves with their
affairs, although invisible to them.</q> He adds that there
was a controversy among the Persians as to the date of this
festival of the dead, some maintaining that the five days
during which it lasted were the last five days of the month
Aban, whereas others held that they were the five supplementary
days which were inserted between the months Aban
and Adhar. The dispute, he continues, was settled by the
adoption of all ten days for the celebration of the feast.<note place='foot'>Albiruni, <hi rend='italic'>The Chronology of
Ancient Nations</hi>, translated and edited
by Dr. C. Edward Sachau (London,
1879), p. 210. In the <hi rend='italic'>Dinkard</hi>, a
Pahlavi work which seems to have
been composed in the first half of the
ninth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, the festival is
spoken of as <q>those ten days which
are the end of the winter and termination
of the year, because the five Gathic
days, among them, are for that purpose.</q>
By <q>the five Gathic days</q> the writer
means the five supplementary days added
at the end of the twelfth month to
complete the year of 365 days. See
<hi rend='italic'>Pahlavi Texts</hi> translated by E. W. West,
Part iv. (Oxford, 1892) p. 17 (<hi rend='italic'>The
Sacred Books of the East</hi>, vol. xxxvii.).</note>
</p>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls
in Brittany
and other
parts of
France.</note>
Similar beliefs as to the annual return of the dead survive
to this day in many parts of Europe and find expression
in similar customs. The day of the dead or of All Souls,
as we call it, is commonly the second of November. Thus
in Lower Brittany the souls of the departed come to visit
the living on the eve of that day. After vespers are over,
the priests and choir walk in procession, <q>the procession of
the charnel-house,</q> chanting a weird dirge in the Breton
tongue. Then the people go home, gather round the fire,
and talk of the departed. The housewife covers the kitchen
table with a white cloth, sets out cider, curds, and hot pancakes
on it, and retires with the family to rest. The fire on
the hearth is kept up by a huge log known as <q>the log of
the dead</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>kef ann Anaon</foreign>). Soon doleful voices outside in
the darkness break the stillness of night. It is the <q>singers
of death</q> who go about the streets waking the sleepers by
a wild and melancholy song, in which they remind the
living in their comfortable beds to pray for the poor souls
in pain. All that night the dead warm themselves at the
hearth and feast on the viands prepared for them. Sometimes
the awe-struck listeners hear the stools creaking in
the kitchen, or the dead leaves outside rustling under the
ghostly footsteps.<note place='foot'>A. le Braz, <hi rend='italic'>La Légende de la Morten
Basse-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1893), pp. 280-287.
Compare J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses
du Bocage Normand</hi> (Condé-sur-Noireau,
1883-1887), ii. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In the Vosges Mountains on All Souls'
Eve the solemn sound of the church bells invites good
Christians to pray for the repose of the dead. While the
bells are ringing, it is customary in some families to uncover
the beds and open the windows, doubtless in order to let the
poor souls enter and rest. No one that evening would dare
to remain deaf to the appeal of the bells. The prayers are
prolonged to a late hour of the night. When the last <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>De
profundis</foreign> has been uttered, the head of the family gently
covers up the beds, sprinkles them with holy water, and
shuts the windows. In some villages fire is kept up on the
hearth and a basket of nuts is placed beside it for the use
of the ghosts.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Le folk-lore des
Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris, 1889), pp. 295
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, in some parts of Saintonge and
Aunis a Candlemas candle used to be lit before the domestic
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
crucifix on All Souls' Day at the very hour when the last
member of the family departed this life; and some people,
just as in Tonquin, refrained from sweeping the house that
day lest they should thereby disturb the ghostly visitors.<note place='foot'>J. L. M. Noguès, <hi rend='italic'>Les mœurs
d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</hi>
(Saintes, 1891), p. 76. As to the
observance of All Souls' Day in other
parts of France see A. Meyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions,
coutumes, légendes et contes des
Ardennes</hi> (Charleville, 1890), pp. 22-24;
Ch. Beauquier, <hi rend='italic'>Les mois en
Franche-Comté</hi> (Paris, 1900), pp. 123-125.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls
in Belgium.</note>
In Bruges, Dinant, and other towns of Belgium holy
candles burn all night in the houses on the Eve of All
Souls, and the bells toll till midnight, or even till morning.
People, too, often set lighted candles on the graves. At
Scherpenheuvel the houses are illuminated, and the people
walk in procession carrying lighted candles in their hands.
A very common custom in Belgium is to eat <q>soul-cakes</q>
or <q>soul-bread</q> on the eve or the day of All Souls. The
eating of them is believed to benefit the dead in some way.
Perhaps originally, as among the Esquimaux of Alaska to
this day,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>.</note> the ghosts were thought to enter into the bodies
of their relatives and so to share the victuals which the
survivors consumed. Similarly at festivals in honour of the
dead in Northern India it is customary to feed Brahmans,
and the food which these holy men partake of is believed
to pass to the deceased and to refresh their languid spirits.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>The Natives of Northern
India</hi> (London, 1907), p. 219.</note>
The same idea of eating and drinking by proxy may perhaps
partly explain many other funeral feasts. Be that as it may,
at Dixmude and elsewhere in Belgium they say that you
deliver a soul from Purgatory for every cake you eat. At
Antwerp they give a local colour to the soul-cakes by baking
them with plenty of saffron, the deep yellow tinge being suggestive
of the flames of Purgatory. People in Antwerp at
the same season are careful not to slam doors or windows
for fear of hurting the ghosts.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Calendrier
Belge</hi> (Brussels, 1861-1862), ii. 236-240;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic,
1863), pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls in
Lechrain.</note>
In Lechrain, a district of Southern Bavaria which
extends along the valley of the Lech from its source to
near the point where the river flows into the Danube, the
two festivals of All Saints and All Souls, on the first
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
and second of November, have significantly fused in popular
usage into a single festival of the dead. In fact, the
people pay little or no heed to the saints and give all
their thoughts to the souls of their departed kinsfolk. The
Feast of All Souls begins immediately after vespers on All
Saints' Day. Even on the eve of All Saints' Day, that
is, on the thirty-first of October, which we call Hallowe'en,
the graveyard is cleaned and every grave adorned. The
decoration consists in weeding the mounds, sprinkling a layer
of charcoal on the bare earth, and marking out patterns on it
in red service-berries. The marigold, too, is still in bloom
at that season in cottage gardens, and garlands of its orange
blooms, mingled with other late flowers left by the departing
summer, are twined about the grey mossgrown tombstones.
The basin of holy water is filled with fresh water and a branch
of box-wood put into it; for box-wood in the popular mind
is associated with death and the dead. On the eve of All
Souls' Day the people begin to visit the graves and to offer
the soul-cakes to the hungry souls. Next morning, before
eight o'clock, commence the vigil, the requiem, and the
solemn visitation of the graves. On that day every household
offers a plate of meal, oats, and spelt on a side-altar in
the church; while in the middle of the sacred edifice a bier
is set, covered with a pall, and surrounded by lighted tapers
and vessels of holy water. The tapers burnt on that day and
indeed generally in services for the departed are red. In the
evening people go, whenever they can do so, to their native
village, where their dear ones lie in the churchyard; and
there at the graves they pray for the poor souls, and leave
an offering of soul-cakes also on a side-altar in the church.
The soul-cakes are baked of dough in the shape of a coil of
hair and are made of all sizes up to three feet long. They
form a perquisite of the sexton.<note place='foot'>Karl Freiherr von Leoprechting,
<hi rend='italic'>Aus dem Lechrain</hi> (Munich, 1855), pp.
198-200.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Soul-cakes
and All
Souls' Day
in Southern
Germany.</note>
The custom of baking soul-cakes, sometimes called simply
<q>souls,</q> on All Souls' Day is widespread in Southern Germany
and Austria;<note place='foot'>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi> (Leipsic,
1863), p. 330. As to these cakes
(called <q>souls</q>) in Swabia see E.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), p. 452, § 174; Anton Birlinger,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</hi> (Freiburg
im Breisgau, 1861-1862), ii. 167
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The cakes are baked of white
flour, and are of a longish rounded
shape with two small tips at each
end.</note> everywhere, we may assume, the cakes were
originally intended for the benefit of the hungry dead, though
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
they are often eaten by the living. In the Upper Palatinate
people throw food into the fire on All Souls' Day for the
poor souls, set lights on the table for them, and pray on
bended knees for their repose. On the graves, too, lights
are kindled, vessels of holy water placed, and food deposited
for the refreshment of the souls. All over the Upper
Palatinate on All Souls' Day it is also customary to bake
special cakes of fine bread and distribute them to the poor,<note place='foot'>Adalbert Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Studien</hi>, ii. (Gütersloh, 1912) pp. 41
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, citing F. Schönwerth, <hi rend='italic'>Aus der
Oberpfalz</hi>, i. 283.</note>
who eat them perhaps as the deputies of the dead.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls in
Bohemia.</note>
The Germans of Bohemia observe All Souls' Day with
much solemnity. Each family celebrates the memory of its
dead. On the eve of the day it is customary to eat cakes and
to drink cold milk for the purpose of cooling the poor souls
who are roasting in purgatory; from which it appears that
spirits feel the soothing effect of victuals consumed vicariously
by their friends on earth. The ringing of the church
bells to prayer on that evening is believed to be the signal
at which the ghosts, released from the infernal gaol, come
trooping to the old familiar fire-side, there to rest from their
pangs for a single night. So in many places people fill a
lamp with butter, light it, and set it on the hearth, that with
the butter the poor ghosts may anoint the burns they have
received from the sulphureous and tormenting flames of
purgatory. Next morning the chime of the church bells,
ringing to early mass, is the knell that bids the souls return
to their place of pain; but such as have completed their
penance take flight to heaven. So on the eve of All Saints'
Day each family gathers in the parlour or the kitchen, speaks
softly of those they have lost, recalls what they said and did
in life, and prays for the repose of their souls. While the
prayer is being said, the children kindle little wax lights
which have been specially bought for the purpose that day.
Next morning the families go to church, where mass is
celebrated for the dead; then they wend their way to the
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
churchyard, where they deck the graves of their kinsfolk with
flowers and wreaths and set little lights upon them. This
custom of illumining the graves and decking them with
flowers on the Eve or Day of All Souls is common all over
Bohemia; it is observed in Prague as well as in the country,
by Czechs as well as by Germans. In some Czech villages
four-cornered cakes of a special sort, baked of white wheaten
meal with milk, are eaten on All Souls' Day or given to
beggars that they may pray for the dead.<note place='foot'>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>
(Prague, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 493-495.</note> Among the
Germans of Western Bohemia poor children go from house
to house on All Souls' Day, begging for soul-cakes, and
when they receive them they pray God to bless all poor
souls. In the southern districts every farmer used to grind
a great quantity of corn against the day and to bake it
into five or six hundred little black soul-cakes which he
gave away to the poor who came begging for them.<note place='foot'>Alois John, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</hi>
(Prague, 1905), p. 97.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls in
Moravia.</note>
All Souls' Day is celebrated with similar rites by
the Germans of Moravia. <q>The festival of the farewell to
summer,</q> says a German writer on this subject, <q>was held
by our heathen forefathers in the beginning of November,
and with the memory of the departed summer they united
the memory of the departed souls, and this last has survived
in the Feast of All Souls, which is everywhere observed with
great piety. On the evening of All Souls the relations of
the departed assemble in the churchyards and adorn the
graves of their dear ones with flowers and lights, while the
children kindle little wax tapers, which have been bought for
them, to light the <q>poor souls.</q> According to the popular
belief, the dead go in procession to the church about midnight,
and any stout-hearted young man can there see all the
living men who will die within the year.</q><note place='foot'>Willibald Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur
Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</hi>
(Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), p. 330.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls in
the Tyrol and Baden.</note>
In the Tyrol the beliefs and customs are similar. There,
too, <q>soul-lights,</q> that is, lamps filled with lard or butter are
lighted and placed on the hearth on All Souls' Eve in order
that poor souls, escaped from the fires of purgatory, may smear
the melted grease on their burns and so alleviate their pangs.
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
Some people also leave milk and dough-nuts for them on
the table all night. The graves also are illuminated with
wax candles and decked with such a profusion of flowers
that you might think it was springtime.<note place='foot'>Ignaz V. Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche
und Meiningen des Tiroler Volkes</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Innsbruck, 1871), pp. 176-178.</note> In the Italian
Tyrol it is customary to give bread or money to the poor on
All Souls' Day; in the Val di Ledro children threaten to
dirty the doors of houses if they do not get the usual dole.
Some rich people treat the poor to bean-soup on that day.
Others put pitchers full of water in the kitchen on All Souls'
night that the poor souls may slake their thirst.<note place='foot'>Christian Schneller, <hi rend='italic'>Märchen und
Sagen aus Wälschtirol</hi> (Innsbruck,
1867), p. 238.</note> In Baden
it is still customary to deck the graves with flowers and
lights on All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day. The lights
are sometimes kindled in hollow turnips, on the sides of
which inscriptions are carved and shine out in the darkness.
If any child steals a turnip-lantern or anything else from a
grave, the indignant ghost who has been robbed appears to
the thief the same night and reclaims his stolen property.
A relic of the old custom of feeding the dead survives in the
practice of giving soul-cakes to godchildren.<note place='foot'>Elard Hugo Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Badisches
Volksleben im neunzehnten Jahrhundert</hi>
(Strasburg, 1900), p. 601.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festivals of
the dead
among the
Letts and
Samagitians.</note>
The Letts used to entertain and feed the souls of the
dead for four weeks from Michaelmas (September 29) to
the day of St. Simon and St. Jude (October 28). They
called the season <foreign rend='italic'>Wellalaick</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Semlicka</foreign>, and regarded it
as so holy that while it lasted they would not willingly
thresh the corn, alleging that grain threshed at that time
would be useless for sowing, since the souls of the dead
would not allow it to sprout. But we may suspect that
the original motive of the abstinence was a fear lest the
blows of the flails should fall upon the poor ghosts
swarming in the air. At this season the people were wont
to prepare food of all sorts for the spirits and set it on the
floor of a room, which had been well heated and swept for
the purpose. Late in the evening the master of the house
went into the room, tended the fire, and called upon his
dead kinsfolk by their names to come and eat and drink.
If he saw the ghosts, he would die within the year; but if
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
he did not see them he would outlive it. When he thought
the souls had eaten and drunk enough, he took the staff
which served as a poker and laying it on the threshold cut
it in two with an axe. At the same time he bade the spirits
go their way, charging them to keep to the roads and paths
and not to tread upon the rye. If the crops turned out ill
next year, the people laid the failure at the door of the
ghosts, who fancied themselves scurvily treated and had
taken their revenge by trampling down the corn.<note place='foot'>P. Einhorn, <q>Historia Lettica,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores Rerum Livonicarum</hi>, ii.
(Riga and Leipsic, 1848) pp. 587, 598,
630 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 645 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> See also the description
of D. Fabricius in his <q>Livonicae
Historiae compendiosa series,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p.
441. Fabricius assigns the custom to
All Souls' Day.</note> The
Samagitians annually invited the dead to come from their
graves and enjoy a bath and a feast. For their entertainment
they prepared a special hut, in which they set out
food and drink, together with a seat and a napkin for every
soul who had been invited. They left the souls to revel by
themselves for three days in the hut; then they deposited
the remains of the banquet on the graves and bade the
ghosts farewell. The good things, however, were usually
consumed by charcoal burners in the forest. This feast of
the dead fell early in November.<note place='foot'>J. Lasicius, <q>De diis Samagitarum
caeterorumque Sarmatarum,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Magazin herausgegeben von der lettisch-literärischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, xiv. 1.
(Mitau, 1868), p. 92.</note> The Esthonians prepare
a meal for their dead on All Souls' Day, the second of
November, and invite them by their names to come and
partake of it. The ghosts arrive in the early morning at
the first cock-crow, and depart at the second, being ceremoniously
lighted out of the house by the head of the
family, who waves a white cloth after them and bids them
come again next year.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem
inneren und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1876), pp. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Boecler-Kreutzwald, <hi rend='italic'>Der Ehsten abergläubische
Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1854), p.
89.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Festival of
the dead
in Russia.</note>
In some parts of the Russian Government of Olonets
the inhabitants of a village sometimes celebrate a joint
festival in honour of all their dead. Having chosen a house
for the purpose, they spread three tables, one outside the
front door, one in the passage, and one in the room which
is heated by a stove. Then they go out to meet their
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
unseen guests and usher them into the house with these
words, <q>Ye are tired, our own ones; take something to eat.</q>
The ghosts accordingly refresh themselves at each table
in succession. Then the master of the house bids them
warm themselves at the stove, remarking that they must
have grown cold in the damp earth. After that the living
guests sit down to eat at the tables. Towards the end of
the meal the host opens the window and lets the ghosts
gently out of it by means of the shroud in which they were
lowered into the grave. As they slide down it from the
warm room into the outer air, the people tell them, <q>Now
it is time for you to go home, and your feet must be tired;
the way is not a little one for you to travel. Here it is
softer for you. Now, in God's name, farewell!</q><note place='foot'>W. R. S. Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1872), pp.
321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The date of the festival is not
mentioned. Apparently it is celebrated
at irregular intervals.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Annual
festivals of
the dead
among the
Votiaks
of Russia.</note>
Among the Votiaks of Russia every family sacrifices to its
dead once a year in the week before Palm Sunday. The sacrifice
is offered in the house about midnight. Flesh, bread, or
cakes and beer are set on the table, and on the floor beside
the table stands a trough of bark with a lighted wax candle
stuck on the rim. The master of the house, having covered
his head with his hat, takes a piece of meat in his hand and
says, <q>Ye spirits of the long departed, guard and preserve
us well. Make none of us cripples. Send no plagues upon
us. Cause the corn, the wine, and the food to prosper
with us.</q><note place='foot'>M. Buch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wotjäken</hi> (Stuttgart,
1882), p. 145.</note> The Votiaks of the Governments of Wjatka and
Kasan celebrate two memorial festivals of the dead every
year, one in autumn and the other in spring. On a certain
day koumiss is distilled, beer brewed, and potato scones
baked in every house. All the members of a clan, who
trace their descent through women from one mythical
ancestress, assemble in a single house, generally in one
which lies at the boundary of the clan land. Here an old
man moulds wax candles; and when the requisite number
is made he sticks them on the shelf of the stove, and begins
to mention the dead relations of the master of the house by
name. For each of them he crumbles a piece of bread,
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
gives each of them a piece of pancake, pours koumiss and
beer, and puts a spoonful of soup into a trough made for
the purpose. All persons present whose parents are dead
follow his example. The dogs are then allowed to eat out
of the trough. If they eat quietly, it is a sign that the dead
live at peace; if they do not eat quietly, it argues the
contrary. Then the company sit down to table and partake
of the meal. Next morning both the dead and the living
refresh themselves with a drink, and a fowl is boiled. The
proceedings are the same as on the evening before. But
now they treat the souls for the last time as a preparation
for their journey, saying: <q>Eat, drink, and go home to your
companions. Live at peace, be gracious to us, keep our
children, guard our corn, our beasts and birds.</q> Then the
people banquet and indulge in all sorts of improprieties.
The women refrain from feasting until the dead have taken
their departure; but when the souls are gone, there is no
longer any motive for abstinence, the koumiss circulates
freely among the women, and they grow wanton. Yet at
this, as at every other festival, the men and women eat in
different parts of the room.<note place='foot'>J. Wasiljev, <hi rend='italic'>Übersicht über die
heidnischen Gebräuche, Aberglauben
und Religion der Wotjäken</hi> (Helsingfors,
1902), pp. 34 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de
la Société Finno-Ougrienne</hi>, xviii.). As
to the Votiak clans see the same work,
pp. 42-44.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls
in the
Abruzzi.</note>
On All Saints' Day, the first of November, shops and
streets in the Abruzzi are filled with candles, which people
buy in order to kindle them in the evening on the graves
of their relations. For all the dead come to visit their
homes that night, the Eve of All Souls, and they need
lights to show them the way. For their use, too, lights are
kept burning in the houses all night. Before people go to
sleep they place on the table a lighted lamp or candle and
a frugal meal of bread and water. The dead issue from
their graves and stalk in procession through every street of
the village. You can see them if you stand at a cross-road
with your chin resting on a forked stick. First pass the
souls of the good, and then the souls of the murdered and
the damned. Once, they say, a man was thus peeping at
the ghastly procession. The good souls told him he had
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
better go home. He did not, and when he saw the tail of
the procession he died of fright.<note place='foot'>G. Finamore, <hi rend='italic'>Credenze, Usi e Costumi
Abruzzesi</hi> (Palermo, 1890), pp.
180-182. Mr. W. R. Paton writes to
me (12th December 1906): <q>You do
not mention the practice[s] on the
modern Greek feast τῶν ψυχῶν (in
May) which quite correspond. The
κόλυβα is made in every house and
put on a table laid with a white tablecloth.
A glass of water and a taper
are put on the table, and all is left so
for the whole night. Our Greek maid-servant
says that when she was a child
she remembers seeing the souls come
and partake. Almost the same rite is
practised for the κόλυβα made on the
commemoration of particular dead.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Soul-cakes
on All-Souls'
Day
in England.
<q>Souling
Day</q> in
Shropshire.</note>
In our own country the old belief in the annual return
of the dead long lingered in the custom of baking <q>soul-cakes</q>
and eating them or distributing them to the poor on
All Souls' Day. Peasant girls used to go from farmhouse
to farmhouse on that day, singing,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Soul, soul, for a soul cake,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Pray you, good mistress, a soul cake.</hi></q><note place='foot'>John Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities
of Great Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883),
i. 393.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In Shropshire down to the seventeenth century it was
customary on All Souls' Day to set on the table a high
heap of soul-cakes, and most visitors to the house took one
of them. The antiquary John Aubrey, who records the
custom, mentions also the appropriate verses:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>A soul-cake, a soul-cake,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Have mercy on all Christen soules for a soule-cake.</hi></q><note place='foot'>John Aubrey, <hi rend='italic'>Remaines of Gentilisme
and Judaisme</hi> (London, 1881),
p. 23.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Indeed the custom of soul-cakes survived in Shropshire
down to the latter part of the nineteenth century and may
not be extinct even now. <q>With us, All Saints' Day is
known as <q>Souling Day,</q> and up to the present time in
many places, poor children, and sometimes men, go out
<q>souling</q>: which means that they go round to the houses of
all the more well-to-do people within reach, reciting a ditty
peculiar to the day, and looking for a dole of cakes, broken
victuals, ale, apples, or money. The two latter are now the
usual rewards, but there are few old North Salopians who
cannot remember when <q>soul-cakes</q> were made at all the
farms and <q>bettermost</q> houses in readiness for the day, and
were given to all who came for them. We are told of
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
liberal housewives who would provide as many as a clothes-basket
full.</q><note place='foot'>Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F.
Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi> (London,
1883), p. 381. The writers record
(pp. 382 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) some of the ditties
which were sung on this occasion by
those who begged for soul-cakes.</note> The same custom of going out <q>a-souling</q>
on All Saints' Day or All Souls' Day used to be observed
in the neighbouring counties of Staffordshire, Cheshire,
Lancashire, Herefordshire, and Monmouthshire. In Herefordshire
the soul-cakes were made of oatmeal, and he or
she who received one of them was bound to say to the
giver:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>God have your saul,</hi></q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Beens and all.</hi></q><note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi>, i. 392, 393; W. Hone,
<hi rend='italic'>Year Book</hi> (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), col. 1288;
T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular
Customs</hi> (London, 1876), pp. 405,
406, 407, 409; J. Harland and T.
T. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Lancashire Folk-lore</hi>
(London, 1882), p. 251; Elizabeth
Mary Wright, <hi rend='italic'>Rustic Speech and Folk-lore</hi>
(Oxford, 1913), p. 300.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Thus the practice of <q>souling</q> appears to have prevailed
especially in the English counties which border on Wales.
In many parts of Wales itself down to the first half of the
nineteenth century poor peasants used to go about begging
for bread on All Souls' Day. The bread bestowed on them
was called <foreign rend='italic'>bara ran</foreign> or dole-bread. <q>This custom was a
survival of the Middle Ages, when the poor begged bread
for the souls of their departed relatives and friends.</q><note place='foot'>Marie Trevelyan, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore and
Folk-stories of Wales</hi> (London, 1909),
p. 255. See also T. F. Thiselton
Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi> (London,
1876), p. 410, who, quoting
Pennant as his authority, says that the
poor people who received soul-cakes
prayed God to bless the next crop of
wheat.</note> However,
the custom was not confined to the west of England,
for at Whitby in Yorkshire down to the early part of the
nineteenth century it was usual to make <q>soul mass loaves</q>
on or about All Souls' Day. They were small round loaves,
sold by bakers at a farthing apiece, chiefly for presents to
children. In former times people used to keep one or two
of them for good luck.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>County Folk-lore</hi>, vol. ii. <hi rend='italic'>North
Riding of Yorkshire, York, and the
Ainsty</hi> (London, 1901), quoting George
Young, <hi rend='italic'>A History of Whitby and
Streoneshalth Abbey</hi> (Whitby, 1817),
ii. 882.</note> In Aberdeenshire, also, <q>on All
Souls' Day, baked cakes of a particular sort are given away
to those who may chance to visit the house, where they are
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
made. The cakes are called <q>dirge-loaf.</q></q><note place='foot'>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British
Popular Customs</hi>, p. 410.</note> Even in the
remote island of St. Kilda it was customary on All Saints'
Day to bake a large cake in the form of a triangle, furrowed
round; the cake must be all eaten that night.<note place='foot'>M. Martin, <q>Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in John
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi> (London,
1808-1814), iii. 666.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Feast of
All Souls
among the
Indians of
Ecuador.</note>
The same mode of celebrating All Souls' Day has been
transported by Catholicism to the New World and imparted
to the aborigines of that continent. Thus in Carchi, a
province of Ecuador, the Indians prepare foods of various
sorts against All Souls' Day, and when the day has come
they take some of the provisions to the church and there
deposit them on tables set out for the purpose. These good
things are the perquisite of the priest, who celebrates mass
for the dead. After the service the Indians repair to the
cemetery, where with burning candles and pots of holy
water they prostrate themselves before the tombs of their
relations, while the priest or the sacristan recites prayers for
the souls of the departed. In the evening the Indians return
to their houses. A table with four lights on it is spread
with food and drink, especially with such things as the dead
loved in their life. The door is left open all night, no doubt
to let the spirits of the dead enter, and the family sits up,
keeping the invisible guests company through the long
hours of darkness. From seven o'clock and onwards troops
of children traverse the village and its neighbourhood. They
go from house to house ringing a bell and crying, <q>We are
angels, we descend from the sky, we ask for bread.</q> The
people go to their doors and beg the children to recite a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pater Noster</foreign> or an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ave Maria</foreign> for the dead whom they
name. When the prayer has been duly said, they give the
children a little of the food from the table. All night long
this goes on, band succeeding band of children. At five
o'clock in the morning the family consumes the remainder
of the food of the souls.<note place='foot'>Dr. Rivet, <q>Le Christianisme et
les Indiens de la République de
l'Équateur,</q> <hi rend='italic'>L'Anthropologie</hi>, xvii.
(1906) pp. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the children going from door
to door during the night of All Souls appear to personate
the souls of the dead who are also abroad at that time;
hence to give bread to the children is the same thing as to
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
give bread to the poor hungry souls. Probably the same
explanation applies to the giving of soul-cakes to children
and the poor on All Souls' Day in Europe.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
nominally
Christian
feast of
All Souls
on Nov. 2
appears
to be an
old Celtic
festival of
the dead
adopted
by the
Church in
998 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> Institution
of the
Feast of
All Souls
by the
Abbot of
Clugny.</note>
A comparison of these European customs with the
similar heathen rites can leave no room for doubt that the
nominally Christian feast of All Souls is nothing but an old
pagan festival of the dead which the Church, unable or
unwilling to suppress, resolved from motives of policy to
connive at. But whence did it borrow the practice of
solemnizing the festival on that particular day, the second
of November? In order to answer this question we should
observe, first, that celebrations of this sort are often held at
the beginning of a New Year,<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>.</note> and, second, that the peoples
of North-Western Europe, the Celts and the Teutons,
appear to have dated the beginning of their year from the
beginning of winter, the Celts reckoning it from the first of
November<note place='foot'>Sir John Rhys, <hi rend='italic'>Celtic Heathendom</hi>
(London and Edinburgh, 1888), pp.
460, 514 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Celtae and Galli,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the British Academy,
1905-1906</hi> (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 78;
<hi rend='italic'>Balder the Beautiful</hi>, i. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and the Teutons from the first of October.<note place='foot'>K. Müllenhoff, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Altertumskunde</hi>,
iv. (Berlin, 1900) pp.
379 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The first of October seems
to have been a great festival among
the Saxons and also the Samagitians.
See Widukind, <hi rend='italic'>Res gestae Saxonicae</hi>,
i. 12 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Latina</hi>,
cxxxvii. 135); M. A. Michov, <q>De
Sarmatia Asiana atque Europea,</q> in
S. Grynaeus's <hi rend='italic'>Novus Orbis Regionum
ac Insularum veteribus incognitarum</hi>
(Bâle, 1532), p. 520. I have to
thank Professor H. M. Chadwick for
pointing out these two passages to
me. Mr. A. Tille prefers to date the
Teutonic winter from Martinmas, the
eleventh of November. See A. Tille,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Geschichte der deutschen Weihnacht</hi>
(Leipsic, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
O. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Reallexikon der indogermanischen
Altertumskunde</hi> (Strasburg,
1901), p. 395.</note>
The difference of reckoning may be due to a difference of
climate, the home of the Teutons in Central and Northern
Europe being a region where winter sets in earlier than on
the more temperate and humid coasts of the Atlantic, the
home of the Celts. These considerations suggest that the
festival of All Souls on the second of November originated
with the Celts, and spread from them to the rest of the
European peoples, who, while they preserved their old
feasts of the dead practically unchanged, may have transferred
them to the second of November. This conjecture
is supported by what we know of the ecclesiastical
institution, or rather recognition, of the festival. For
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
that recognition was first accorded at the end of the
tenth century in France, a Celtic country, from which the
Church festival gradually spread over Europe. It was Odilo,
abbot of the great Benedictine monastery of Clugny, who
initiated the change in 998 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> by ordering that in all the
monasteries over which he ruled, a solemn mass should be
celebrated on the second of November for all the dead who
sleep in Christ. The example thus set was followed by
other religious houses, and the bishops, one after another,
introduced the new celebration into their dioceses. Thus
the festival of All Souls gradually established itself throughout
Christendom, though in fact the Church has never
formally sanctioned it by a general edict nor attached
much weight to its observance. Indeed, when objections
were raised to the festival at the Reformation, the ecclesiastical
authorities seemed ready to abandon it.<note place='foot'>A. J. Binterim, <hi rend='italic'>Die vorzüglichsten
Denkwürdigkeiten der Christ-Katholischen
Kirche</hi>, v. 1 (Mayence, 1829),
pp. 493 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. J. Herzog und G. F.
Plitt, <hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie für protestantische
Theologie und Kirche</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. (Leipsic,
1877), pp. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Smith and S.
Cheetham, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Christian
Antiquities</hi> (London, 1875-1880), i.
57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These
facts are explained very simply by the theory that an old
Celtic commemoration of the dead lingered in France down
to the end of the tenth century, and was then, as a measure
of policy and a concession to ineradicable paganism, at last
incorporated in the Catholic ritual. The consciousness of
the heathen origin of the practice would naturally prevent
the supreme authorities from insisting strongly on its
observance. They appear rightly to have regarded it as
an outpost which they could surrender to the forces of
rationalism without endangering the citadel of the faith.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The feast
of All
Saints on
Nov. 1
seems also
to have
displaced
a heathen
festival of
the dead.</note>
Perhaps we may go a step further and explain in like
manner the origin of the feast of All Saints on the first of
November. For the analogy of similar customs elsewhere
would lead us to suppose that the old Celtic festival of the
dead was held on the Celtic New Year's Day, that is, on the
first, not the second, of November. May not then the
institution of the feast of All Saints on that day have
been the first attempt of the Church to give a colour of
Christianity to the ancient heathen rite by substituting the
saints for the souls of the dead as the true object of worship?
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
The facts of history seem to countenance this hypothesis.
For the feast of All Saints was instituted in France and
Germany by order of the Emperor Lewis the Pious in
835 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, that is, about a hundred and sixty years before
the introduction of the feast of All Souls. The innovation
was made by the advice of the pope, Gregory IV., whose
motive may well have been that of suppressing an old pagan
custom which was still notoriously practised in France and
Germany. The idea, however, was not a novel one, for the
testimony of Bede proves that in Britain, another Celtic
country, the feast of All Saints on the first of November was
already celebrated in the eighth century.<note place='foot'>A. J. Binterim, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> v. 1, pp.
487 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. J. Herzog und G. F.
Plitt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. p. 303; W. Smith and
S. Cheetham, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Christian
Antiquities</hi>, i. 57. In the last of these
works a passage from the <hi rend='italic'>Martyrologium
Romanum Vetus</hi> is quoted which
states that a feast of Saints (<hi rend='italic'>Festivitas
Sanctorum</hi>) on the first of November
was celebrated at Rome. But the
date of this particular Martyrology is
disputed. See A. J. Binterim, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
v. 1, pp. 52-54.</note> We may conjecture
that this attempt to divert the devotion of the
faithful from the souls of the dead to the saints proved a
failure, and that finally the Church reluctantly decided to
sanction the popular superstition by frankly admitting a feast
of All Souls into the calendar. But it could not assign the
new, or rather the old, festival to the old day, the first of
November, since that was already occupied by the feast of
All Saints. Accordingly it placed the mass for the dead on
the next day, the second of November. On this theory the
feasts of All Saints and of All Souls mark two successive
efforts of the Catholic Church to eradicate an old heathen
festival of the dead. Both efforts failed. <q>In all Catholic
countries the day of All Souls has preserved the serious
character of a festival of the dead which no worldly gaieties
are allowed to disturb. It is then the sacred duty of the
survivors to visit the graves of their loved ones in the
churchyard, to deck them with flowers and lights, and to
utter a devout prayer&mdash;a pious custom with which in cities
like Paris and Vienna even the gay and frivolous comply
for the sake of appearance, if not to satisfy an impulse of
the heart.</q><note place='foot'>J. J. Herzog und G. F. Plitt,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 304. A similar attempt to
reform religion by diverting the devotion
of the people from the spirits of their
dead appears to have been made in
antiquity by the doctors of the Persian
faith. For that faith <q>in its most
finished and purest form, in the <hi rend='italic'>Gathas</hi>,
does not recognize the dead as objects
worthy of worship and sacrifice. But
the popular beliefs were too firmly
rooted, and the Mazdeans, like the
sectaries of many other ideal and lofty
forms of religion, were forced to give
way. As they could not suppress the
worship and get rid of the primitive
and crude ideas involved in it, they
set about the reform in another way:
they interpreted the worship in a new
manner, and thus the worship of the
dead became a worship of the gods or
of a god in favour of the loved and lost
ones, a pious commemoration of their
names and their virtues.</q> See N.
Söderblom, <hi rend='italic'>Les Fravashis</hi> (Paris, 1899),
pp. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The <hi rend='italic'>Gathas</hi> form the oldest
part of the <hi rend='italic'>Zend-Avesta</hi>. James
Darmesteter, indeed, in his later life
startled the learned world by a theory
that the <hi rend='italic'>Gathas</hi> were a comparatively
late work based on the teaching of
Philo of Alexandria. But this attempt
of a Jew to claim for his race the
inspiration of the Persian scriptures
has been coldly received by Gentile
scholars. See J. H. Moulton, <hi rend='italic'>Early
Zoroastrianism</hi> (London, 1913), pp. 8
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. The Festival in the month of Athyr.'/>
<head>§ 3. The Festival in the Month of Athyr.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Festival of
the death
and resurrection
of
Osiris in
the month
of Athyr. The finding
of Osiris.</note>
The foregoing evidence lends some support to the conjecture&mdash;for
it is only a conjecture&mdash;that the great festival
of Osiris at Sais, with its accompanying illumination of the
houses, was a night of All Souls, when the ghosts of the
dead swarmed in the streets and revisited their old homes,
which were lit up to welcome them back again. Herodotus,
who briefly describes the festival, omits to mention its date,
but we can determine it with some probability from other
sources. Thus Plutarch tells us that Osiris was murdered
on the seventeenth of the month Athyr, and that the
Egyptians accordingly observed mournful rites for four
days from the seventeenth of Athyr.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 39. As
to the death of Osiris on the seventeenth
of Athyr see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 13 and 42.
Plutarch's statement on this subject is
confirmed by the evidence of the
papyrus Sallier IV., a document dating
from the 19th dynasty, which places
the lamentation for Osiris at Sais on
the seventeenth day of Athyr. See
A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites Buch</hi>,
p. 262; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die Religion der alten
Ägypter</hi>, p. 112; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, pp. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now in the Alexandrian
calendar, which Plutarch used, these four days
corresponded to the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and
sixteenth of November, and this date answers exactly to
the other indications given by Plutarch, who says that at
the time of the festival the Nile was sinking, the north
winds dying away, the nights lengthening, and the leaves
falling from the trees. During these four days a gilt cow
swathed in a black pall was exhibited as an image of Isis.
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
This, no doubt, was the image mentioned by Herodotus in
his account of the festival.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</note> On the nineteenth day of the
month the people went down to the sea, the priests carrying
a shrine which contained a golden casket. Into this casket
they poured fresh water, and thereupon the spectators raised
a shout that Osiris was found. After that they took some
vegetable mould, moistened it with water, mixed it with
precious spices and incense, and moulded the paste into a
small moon-shaped image, which was then robed and
ornamented.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 39. The
words which I have translated <q>vegetable
mould</q> are γῆν κάρπιμον, literally,
<q>fruitful earth.</q> The composition of
the image was very important, as we
shall see presently.</note> Thus it appears that the purpose of the
ceremonies described by Plutarch was to represent dramatically,
first, the search for the dead body of Osiris, and,
second, its joyful discovery, followed by the resurrection of
the dead god who came to life again in the new image of
vegetable mould and spices. Lactantius tells us how on
these occasions the priests, with their shaven bodies, beat
their breasts and lamented, imitating the sorrowful search
of Isis for her lost son Osiris, and how afterwards their
sorrow was turned to joy when the jackal-headed god
Anubis, or rather a mummer in his stead, produced a small
boy, the living representative of the god who was lost and
was found.<note place='foot'>Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>Divin. Institut.</hi>, i. 21;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Epitome Inst. Divin.</hi> 23 (18, ed.
Brandt and Laubmann). The description
of the ceremony which Minucius
Felix gives (<hi rend='italic'>Octavius</hi>, xxii. 1) agrees
closely with, and is probably copied
from, that of Lactantius. We know
from Appian (<hi rend='italic'>Bell. Civ.</hi> iv. 6. 47)
that in the rites of Isis a priest personated
Anubis, wearing a dog's, or
perhaps rather a jackal's, mask on his
head; for the historian tells how in the
great proscription a certain Volusius,
who was on the condemned list, escaped
in the disguise of a priest of Isis,
wearing a long linen garment and the
mask of a dog over his head.</note> Thus Lactantius regarded Osiris as the son
instead of the husband of Isis, and he makes no mention of
the image of vegetable mould. It is probable that the boy
who figured in the sacred drama played the part, not of
Osiris, but of his son Horus;<note place='foot'>The suggestion is due to Prof. A.
Wiedemann (<hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites Buch</hi>, p.
261).</note> but as the death and
resurrection of the god were celebrated in many cities of
Egypt, it is also possible that in some places the part of the
god come to life was played by a living actor instead of by
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
an image. Another Christian writer describes how the
Egyptians, with shorn heads, annually lamented over a buried
idol of Osiris, smiting their breasts, slashing their shoulders,
ripping open their old wounds, until, after several days of
mourning, they professed to find the mangled remains of the
god, at which they rejoiced.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, 2. Herodotus
tells (ii. 61) how the Carians cut their
foreheads with knives at the mourning
for Osiris.</note> However the details of the
ceremony may have varied in different places, the pretence
of finding the god's body, and probably of restoring it to
life, was a great event in the festal year of the Egyptians.
The shouts of joy which greeted it are described or alluded
to by many ancient writers.<note place='foot'>In addition to the writers who
have been already cited see Juvenal,
viii. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Athenagoras, <hi rend='italic'>Supplicatio
pro Christianis</hi>, 22, pp. 112, 114, ed.
J. C. T. Otto (Jena, 1857); Tertullian,
<hi rend='italic'>Adversus Marcionem</hi>, i. 13; Augustine,
<hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, vi. 10.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. The Festival in the month of Khoiak.'/>
<head>§ 4. The Festival in the Month of Khoiak.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The great
Osirian inscription
at
Denderah.</note>
The funeral rites of Osiris, as they were observed at his
great festival in the sixteen provinces of Egypt, are described
in a long inscription of the Ptolemaic period, which is
engraved on the walls of the god's temple at Denderah, the
Tentyra of the Greeks, a town of Upper Egypt situated on
the western bank of the Nile about forty miles north of
Thebes.<note place='foot'>W. Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Greek
and Roman Geography</hi>, ii. 1127.</note> Unfortunately, while the information thus furnished
is remarkably full and minute on many points, the arrangement
adopted in the inscription is so confused and the
expression often so obscure that a clear and consistent
account of the ceremonies as a whole can hardly be extracted
from it. Moreover, we learn from the document that the
ceremonies varied somewhat in the several cities, the ritual
of Abydos, for example, differing from that of Busiris. Without
attempting to trace all the particularities of local usage
I shall briefly indicate what seem to have been the leading
features of the festival, so far as these can be ascertained
with tolerable certainty.<note place='foot'>For complete translations of the
inscription see H. Brugsch, <q>Das
Osiris-Mysterium von Tentyra,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für ägyptische Sprache und
Alterthumskunde</hi>, 1881, pp. 77-111;
V. Loret, <q>Les fêtes d'Osiris au mois
de Khoiak,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Recueil de Travaux relatifs
à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie Égyptiennes
et Assyriennes</hi>, iii. (1882) pp.
43-57, iv. (1883) pp. 21-33, v. (1884)
pp. 85-103. On the document and the
festivals described in it see further A.
Mariette-Pacha, <hi rend='italic'>Dendérah</hi> (Paris, 1880),
pp. 334-347; J. Dümichen, <q>Die
dem Osiris im Denderatempel geweihten
Räume,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für ägyptische
Sprache und Alterthumskunde</hi>, 1882,
pp. 88-101; H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
und Mythologie der alten Aegypter</hi>
(Leipsic, 1885-1888), pp. 616-618;
R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di Mitologia
Egizia</hi>, pp. 725-744; A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites Buch</hi>, p. 262; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Osiris végétant,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Le Muséon</hi>, N.S. iv.
(1903) p. 113; E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>, ii. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>,
ii. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Miss Margaret
A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The Osireion at Abydos</hi>
(London, 1904), pp. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The rites
of Osiris
in the
month of
Khoiak
represented
the god as
dead, dismembered,
and then
reconstituted
by
the union
of his
scattered
limbs.</note>
The rites lasted eighteen days, from the twelfth to the
thirtieth of the month Khoiak, and set forth the nature of
Osiris in his triple aspect as dead, dismembered, and finally
reconstituted by the union of his scattered limbs. In the first
of these aspects he was called Chent-Ament (Khenti-Amenti),
in the second Osiris-Sep, and in the third Sokari (Seker).<note place='foot'>R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 727.</note>
Small images of the god were moulded of sand or vegetable
earth and corn, to which incense was sometimes added;<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
ägyptische Sprache und Alterthumskunde</hi>,
1881, pp. 80-82; A. Wiedemann,
in <hi rend='italic'>Le Muséon</hi>, N.S. iv. (1903)
p. 113. The corn used in the making
of the images is called barley by
Brugsch and Miss M. A. Murray (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>),
but wheat (<foreign rend='italic'>blé</foreign>) by Mr. V. Loret.</note> his
face was painted yellow and his cheek-bones green.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 99, 101.</note> These
images were cast in a mould of pure gold, which represented
the god in the form of a mummy, with the white crown of
Egypt on his head.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 728; Miss
Margaret A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 27.</note> The festival opened on the twelfth
day of Khoiak with a ceremony of ploughing and sowing.
Two black cows were yoked to the plough, which was made
of tamarisk wood, while the share was of black copper. A
boy scattered the seed. One end of the field was sown
with barley, the other with spelt, and the middle with flax.
During the operation the chief celebrant recited the ritual
chapter of <q>the sowing of the fields.</q><note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 96
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 98; R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
743 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The
Gods of the Egyptians</hi>, ii. 128. According
to Lanzone, the ploughing took
place, not on the first, but on the last
day of the festival, namely, on the
thirtieth of Khoiak; and that certainly
appears to have been the date of the
ploughing at Busiris, for the inscription
directs that there <q>the ploughing of
the earth shall take place in the
Serapeum of <foreign rend='italic'>Aa-n-beḥ</foreign> under the fine
Persea trees on the last day of the
month Khoiak</q> (H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 84).</note> At Busiris on the
twentieth of Khoiak sand and barley were put in the god's
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
<q>garden,</q> which appears to have been a sort of large flower-pot.
This was done in the presence of the cow-goddess
Shenty, represented seemingly by the image of a cow made
of gilt sycamore wood with a headless human image in its
inside. <q>Then fresh inundation water was poured out of a
golden vase over both the goddess and the <q>garden</q> and the
barley was allowed to grow as the emblem of the resurrection
of the god after his burial in the earth, <q>for the growth
of the garden is the growth of the divine substance.</q></q><note place='foot'>Miss Margaret A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The
Osireion at Abydos</hi>, p. 28; H. Brugsch,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 83, 92. The headless
human image in the cow may have
stood for Isis, who is said to have been
decapitated by her son Horus, and to
have received from Thoth a cow's head
as a substitute. See Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, 20; G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne
des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</hi>,
i. 177; Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Isis,</q> in
W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech.
und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 366.</note> On
the twenty-second of Khoiak, at the eighth hour, the images
of Osiris, attended by thirty-four images of deities, performed
a mysterious voyage in thirty-four tiny boats made of
papyrus, which were illuminated by three hundred and sixty-five
lights.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 738-740;
A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites Buch</hi>,
p. 262; Miss M. A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 35. An Egyptian calendar, written
at Sais about 300 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, has under the
date 26 Khoiak the following entry:
<q>Osiris goes about and the golden
boat is brought forth.</q> See <hi rend='italic'>The
Hibeh Papyri</hi>, Part i., edited by B. P.
Grenfell and A. S. Hunt (London,
1906), pp. 146, 153. In the Canopic
decree <q>the voyage of the sacred boat
of Osiris</q> is said to take place on the
29th of Khoiak from <q>the sanctuary
in the Heracleum</q> to the Canopic
sanctuary. See W. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Orientis
Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</hi>, No.
56 (vol. i. pp. 105, 108). Hence it
would seem that the date of this part
of the festival varied somewhat in
different places or at different times.</note> On the twenty-fourth of Khoiak, after sunset,
the effigy of Osiris in a coffin of mulberry wood was laid in
the grave, and at the ninth hour of the night the effigy
which had been made and deposited the year before was
removed and placed upon boughs of sycamore.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 99; E.
A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the
Egyptians</hi>, ii. 129; compare Miss
Margaret A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 28,
who refers the ceremony to the twenty-fifth
of Khoiak.</note> Lastly, on
the thirtieth day of Khoiak they repaired to the holy
sepulchre, a subterranean chamber over which appears to
have grown a clump of Persea-trees. Entering the vault by
the western door, they laid the coffined effigy of the dead god
reverently on a bed of sand in the chamber. So they left him
to his rest, and departed from the sepulchre by the eastern
door. Thus ended the ceremonies in the month of Khoiak.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 94, 99;
A. Mariette-Pacha, <hi rend='italic'>Dendérah</hi>, pp. 336
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 744.
Mariette supposed that after depositing
the new image in the sepulchre they
carried out the old one of the preceding
year, thus setting forth the resurrection
as well as the death of the god. But
this view is apparently not shared by
Brugsch and Lanzone.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. The Resurrection of Osiris.'/>
<head>§ 5. The Resurrection of Osiris.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The resurrection
of
Osiris
represented
on the
monuments.</note>
In the foregoing account of the festival, drawn from the
great inscription of Denderah, the burial of Osiris figures
prominently, while his resurrection is implied rather than
expressed. This defect of the document, however, is amply
compensated by a remarkable series of bas-reliefs which
accompany and illustrate the inscription. These exhibit in
a series of scenes the dead god lying swathed as a mummy
on his bier, then gradually raising himself up higher and
higher, until at last he has entirely quitted the bier and is
seen erect between the guardian wings of the faithful Isis,
who stands behind him, while a male figure holds up before
his eyes the <foreign rend='italic'>crux ansata</foreign>, the Egyptian symbol of life.<note place='foot'>A. Mariette-Bey, <hi rend='italic'>Dendérah</hi>, iv.
(Paris, 1873) plates 65, 66, 68, 69, 70,
71, 72, 88, 89, 90; R. V. Lanzone,
<hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di Mitologia Egizia</hi>, pp.
757 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, with plates cclxviii.-ccxcii.;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the
Egyptians</hi>, ii. 131-138; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris
and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, ii.
31 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The
resurrection of the god could hardly be portrayed more
graphically. Even more instructive, however, is another
representation of the same event in a chamber dedicated to
Osiris in the great temple of Isis at Philae. Here we see
the dead body of Osiris with stalks of corn springing from
it, while a priest waters the stalks from a pitcher which he
holds in his hand. The accompanying inscription sets forth
that <q>this is the form of him whom one may not name,
Osiris of the mysteries, who springs from the returning
waters.</q><note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie
der alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 621; R.
V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di Mitologia
Egizia</hi>, plate cclxi.; A. Wiedemann,
<q>L'Osiris végétant,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Le Muséon</hi>,
N.S. iv. (1903) p. 112; E. A. Wallis
Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, i. 58. According to Prof.
Wiedemann, the corn springing from
the god's body is barley. Similarly
in a papyrus of the Louvre (No. 3377)
Osiris is represented swathed as a
mummy and lying on his back, while
stalks of corn sprout from his body.
See R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 801
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, with plate ccciii. 2; A. Wiedemann,
<q>L'Osiris végétant,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Le Muséon</hi>,
N.S. iv. (1903) p. 112.</note> Taken together, the picture and the words seem
to leave no doubt that Osiris was here conceived and represented
as a personification of the corn which springs from
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
the fields after they have been fertilized by the inundation.
This, according to the inscription, was the kernel of the
mysteries, the innermost secret revealed to the initiated. So
in the rites of Demeter at Eleusis a reaped ear of corn was
exhibited to the worshippers as the central mystery of their
religion.<note place='foot'>Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refutatio omnium
haeresium</hi>, v. 8, p. 162 ed. L. Duncker
and F. G. Schneidewin (Göttingen,
1859). See <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of
the Wild</hi>, i. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We can now fully understand why at the great
festival of sowing in the month of Khoiak the priests used
to bury effigies of Osiris made of earth and corn. When
these effigies were taken up again at the end of a year or of
a shorter interval, the corn would be found to have sprouted
from the body of Osiris, and this sprouting of the grain
would be hailed as an omen, or rather as the cause, of the
growth of the crops.<note place='foot'>Prof. A. Erman rightly assumes
(<hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 234) that
the images made in the month of
Khoiak were intended to germinate as
a symbol of the divine resurrection.</note> The corn-god produced the corn
from himself: he gave his own body to feed the people: he
died that they might live.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Corn-stuffed
effigies of
Osiris
buried with
the dead
to ensure
their resurrection.</note>
And from the death and resurrection of their great god
the Egyptians drew not only their support and sustenance
in this life, but also their hope of a life eternal beyond the
grave. This hope is indicated in the clearest manner by
the very remarkable effigies of Osiris which have come to
light in Egyptian cemeteries. Thus in the Valley of the
Kings at Thebes there was found the tomb of a royal fan-bearer
who lived about 1500 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Among the rich contents
of the tomb there was a bier on which rested a mattress of
reeds covered with three layers of linen. On the upper side
of the linen was painted a life-size figure of Osiris; and the
interior of the figure, which was waterproof, contained a
mixture of vegetable mould, barley, and a sticky fluid. The
barley had sprouted and sent out shoots two or three inches
long.<note place='foot'>A. Wiedemann, <q>L'Osiris végétant,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Le Muséon</hi>, N.S. iv. (1903)
p. 111; <hi rend='italic'>Egyptian Exploration Fund
Archaeological Report, 1898-1899</hi>, pp.
24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Kings and Gods of
Egypt</hi> (New York and London, 1912),
p. 94, with plate xi.; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mystères
Égyptiens</hi> (Paris, 1913), p. 41.</note> Again, in the cemetery at Cynopolis <q>were numerous
burials of Osiris figures. These were made of grain wrapped
up in cloth and roughly shaped like an Osiris, and placed
inside a bricked-up recess at the side of the tomb, sometimes
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
in small pottery coffins, sometimes in wooden coffins in the
form of a hawk-mummy, sometimes without any coffins
at all.</q><note place='foot'>B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt, in
<hi rend='italic'>Egyptian Exploration Fund Archaeological
Report, 1902-1903</hi>, p. 5.</note> These corn-stuffed figures were bandaged like
mummies with patches of gilding here and there, as if
in imitation of the golden mould in which the similar
figures of Osiris were cast at the festival of sowing.<note place='foot'>Miss Margaret A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The
Osireion at Abydos</hi>, pp. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again,
effigies of Osiris, with faces of green wax and their interior
full of grain, were found buried near the necropolis of
Thebes.<note place='foot'>Sir J. Gardiner Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>A
Second Series of the Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1841), ii. 300, note §. The
writer seems to have doubted whether
these effigies represented Osiris. But
the doubt has been entirely removed
by subsequent discoveries. Wilkinson's
important note on the subject is
omitted by his editor, S. Birch (vol.
iii. p. 375, ed. 1878).</note> Finally, we are told by Professor Erman that
between the legs of mummies <q>there sometimes lies a figure
of Osiris made of slime; it is filled with grains of corn, the
sprouting of which is intended to signify the resurrection of
the god.</q><note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We cannot doubt that, just as the burial of
corn-stuffed images of Osiris in the earth at the festival of
sowing was designed to quicken the seed, so the burial of
similar images in the grave was meant to quicken the
dead, in other words, to ensure their spiritual immortality.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. Readjustment of Egyptian Festivals.'/>
<head>§ 6. Readjustment of Egyptian Festivals.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
festivals of
Osiris in
the months
of Athyr
and
Khoiak
seem to
have been
substantially
the
same.</note>
The festival of Osiris which Plutarch assigns to the
month of Athyr would seem to be identical in substance
with the one which the inscription of Denderah assigns to
the following month, namely, to Khoiak. Apparently the
essence of both festivals was a dramatic representation of
the death and resurrection of the god; in both of them Isis
was figured by a gilt cow, and Osiris by an image moulded
of moist vegetable earth. But if the festivals were the same,
why were they held in different months? It is easy to
suggest that different towns in Egypt celebrated the festival
at different dates. But when we remember that according
to the great inscription of Denderah, the authority of which
is indisputable, the festival fell in the month of Khoiak in
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
every province of Egypt, we shall be reluctant to suppose
that at some one place, or even at a few places, it was
exceptionally held in the preceding month of Athyr, and
that the usually well-informed Plutarch described the
exception as if it had been the rule, of which on this
supposition he must have been wholly ignorant. More
probably the discrepancy is to be explained by the great
change which came over the Egyptian calendar between the
date of the inscription and the lifetime of Plutarch. For
when the inscription was drawn up in the Ptolemaic age
the festivals were dated by the old vague or movable year,
and therefore rotated gradually through the whole circle of
the seasons; whereas at the time when Plutarch wrote,
about the end of the first century, they were seemingly
dated by the fixed Alexandrian year, and accordingly had
ceased to rotate.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The old
festival of
Khoiak
may have
been
transferred
to Athyr
when the
Egyptians
adopted
the fixed
Alexandrian
year in
30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note>
But even if we grant that in Plutarch's day the festivals
had become stationary, still this would not explain why the
old festival of Khoiak had been transferred to Athyr. In
order to understand that transference it seems necessary to
suppose that when the Egyptians gave to their months fixed
places in the solar year by accepting the Alexandrian
system of intercalation, they at the same time transferred
the festivals from what may be called their artificial to their
natural dates. Under the old system a summer festival was
sometimes held in winter and a winter festival in summer;
a harvest celebration sometimes fell at the season of sowing,
and a sowing celebration at the season of harvest. People
might reconcile themselves to such anomalies so long as
they knew that they were only temporary, and that in the
course of time the festivals would necessarily return to their
proper seasons. But it must have been otherwise when
they adopted a fixed instead of a movable year, and so
arrested the rotation of the festivals for ever. For they
could not but be aware that every festival would thenceforth
continue to occupy for all time that particular place in the
solar year which it chanced to occupy in the year 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>,
when the calendar became fixed. If in that particular year
it happened, as it might have happened, that the summer
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
festivals were held in winter and the winter festivals in
summer, they would always be so held in future; the
absurdity and anomaly would never again be rectified as it
had been before. This consideration, which could not have
escaped intelligent men, must have suggested the advisability
of transferring the festivals from the dates at which they
chanced to be celebrated in 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> to the dates at which
they ought properly to be celebrated in the course of nature.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The transference
would be
intelligible
if we
suppose
that in
30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> the
dates of
all the
Egyptian
festivals
were
shifted
backward
by about
a month in
order to
restore
them to
their
natural
places
in the
calendar.</note>
Now what in the year 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> was the actual amount of
discrepancy between the accidental and the natural dates of
the festivals? It was a little more than a month. In
that year Thoth, the first month of the Egyptian calendar,
happened to begin on the twenty-ninth of August,<note place='foot'>So it was reckoned at the time.
But, strictly speaking, Thoth in that
year began on August 31. The miscalculation
originated in a blunder of
the ignorant Roman pontiffs who, being
charged with the management of the
new Julian calendar, at first intercalated
a day every third, instead of
every fourth, year. See Solinus, <hi rend='italic'>Collectanea</hi>,
i. 45-47 (p. 15, ed. Th.
Mommsen, Berlin, 1864); Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn</hi>, i. 14. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. Ideler,
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen und
technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 157-161.</note> whereas
according to theory it should have begun with the heliacal
rising of Sirius on the twentieth of July, that is, forty
days or, roughly speaking, a month earlier. From this
it follows that in the year 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> all the Egyptian
festivals fell about a month later than their natural dates,
and they must have continued to fall a month late for
ever if they were allowed to retain those places in the
calendar which they chanced to occupy in that particular
year. In these circumstances it would be a natural and
sensible thing to restore the festivals to their proper places
in the solar year by celebrating them one calendar month
earlier than before.<note place='foot'><p>Theoretically the shift should have
been 40, or rather 42 days, that being the
interval between July 20 and August 29
or 31 (see the preceding note). If that
shift was actually made, the calendar
date of any festival in the old vague
Egyptian year could be found by adding
40 or 42 days to its date in the Alexandrian
year. Thus if the death of
Osiris fell on the 17th of Athyr in the
Alexandrian year, it should have fallen
on the 27th or 29th of Khoiak in the
old vague year; and if his resurrection
fell on the 19th of Athyr in the Alexandrian
year, it should have fallen on
the 29th of Khoiak or the 1st of
Tybi in the old vague year. These
calculations agree nearly, but not
exactly, with the somewhat uncertain
indications of the Denderah calendar
(above, p. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>), and also with the independent
evidence which we possess
that the resurrection of Osiris was
celebrated on the 30th of Khoiak
(below, pp. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). These approximate
agreements to some extent confirm my theory that, with the adoption
of the fixed Alexandrian year, the dates
of the official Egyptian festivals were
shifted from their accidental places in
the calendar to their proper places in
the natural year.
</p>
<p>
Since I published in the first edition
of this book (1906) my theory that
with the adoption of the fixed Alexandrian
year in 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> the Egyptian
festivals were shifted about a month
backward in the year, Professor Ed.
Meyer has shown independent grounds
for holding <q>that the festivals which
gave rise to the later names of the
(Egyptian) months were demonstrably
held a month later in earlier ages,
under the twentieth, eighteenth, indeed
partly under the twelfth dynasty; in
other words, that after the end of the
New Kingdom the festivals and the
corresponding names of the months were
displaced one month backwards. It is
true that this displacement can as yet
be proved for only five months; but as
the names of these months and the
festivals keep their relative position
towards each other, the assumption is
inevitable that the displacement affected
not merely particular festivals but the
whole system equally.</q> See Ed.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Nachträge zur ägyptischen
Chronologie</hi> (Berlin, 1908), pp. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königl. Preuss.
Akademie der Wissenschaften vom
Jahre 1907</hi>). Thus it is possible that
the displacement of the festivals by a
month backward in the calendar took
place a good deal earlier than I had
supposed. In the uncertainty of the
whole question I leave my theory as it
stood.</p></note> If this measure were adopted the
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
festivals which had hitherto been held, for example, in the
third month Athyr would henceforth be held in the second
month Phaophi; the festivals which had hitherto fallen in
the fourth month Khoiak would thenceforth fall in the
third month Athyr; and so on. Thus the festal calendar
would be reduced to harmony with the seasons instead of
being in more or less flagrant discord with them, as it had
generally been before, and must always have been afterwards
if the change which I have indicated had not been
introduced. It is only to credit the native astronomers and
the Roman rulers of Egypt with common sense to suppose
that they actually adopted the measure. On that supposition
we can perfectly understand why the festival of sowing,
which had formerly belonged to the month of Khoiak, was
transferred to Athyr. For in the Alexandrian calendar
Khoiak corresponds very nearly to December, and Athyr to
November. But in Egypt the month of November, not the
month of December, is the season of sowing. There was
therefore every reason why the great sowing festival of the
corn-god Osiris should be held in Athyr and not Khoiak, in
November and not in December. In like manner we may
suppose that all the Egyptian festivals were restored to their
true places in the solar year, and that when Plutarch dates
a festival both by its calendar month and by its relation to
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
the cycle of the seasons, he is perfectly right in doing so,
and we may accept his evidence with confidence instead of
having to accuse him of ignorantly confounding the movable
Egyptian with the fixed Alexandrian year. Accusations of
ignorance levelled at the best writers of antiquity are apt to
recoil on those who make them.<note place='foot'>If the results of the foregoing
inquiry be accepted, the resurrection
of Osiris was regularly celebrated in
Egypt on the 15th of November from
the year 30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> onward, since the
15th of November corresponded to
the 19th of Athyr (the resurrection
day) in the fixed Alexandrian year.
This agrees with the indications of the
Roman Rustic Calendars, which place
the resurrection (<foreign rend='italic'>heuresis</foreign>, that is, the
discovery of Osiris) between the 14th
and the 30th of November. Yet according
to the calendar of Philocalus, the
official Roman celebration of the resurrection
seems to have been held on the
1st of November, not on the 15th.
How is the discrepancy to be explained?
Th. Mommsen supposed that the
festival was officially adopted at Rome
at a time when the 19th of Athyr of
the vague Egyptian year corresponded
to the 31st of October or the 1st of
November of the Julian calendar, and
that the Romans, overlooking the
vague or shifting character of the
Egyptian year, fixed the resurrection
of Osiris permanently on the 1st of
November. Now the 19th of Athyr
of the vague year corresponded to the
1st of November in the years 32-35 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
and to the 31st of October in the years
36-39; and it appears that the festival
was officially adopted at Rome some
time before 65 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> (Lucan, <hi rend='italic'>Pharsalia</hi>,
viii. 831 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>). It is unlikely that the
adoption took place in the reign of
Tiberius, who died in 37 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>; for he
is known to have persecuted the
Egyptian religion (Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi>,
ii. 85; Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Tiberius</hi>, 36;
Josephus, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit. Jud.</hi> xviii. 3. 4);
hence Mommsen concluded that the
great festival of Osiris was officially
adopted at Rome in the early years of
the reign of Caligula, that is, in 37, 38,
or 39 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> See Th. Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Corpus
Inscriptionum Latinarum</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Pars
prior (Berlin, 1893), pp. 333 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. Dessau, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones Latinae
Selectae</hi>, vol. ii. p. 995, No. 8745.
This theory of Mommsen's assumes
that in Egypt the festivals were still
regulated by the old vague year
in the first century of our era. It
cannot, therefore, be reconciled with
the conclusion reached in the text that
the Egyptian festivals ceased to be
regulated by the old vague year from
30 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> onward. How the difference
of date between the official Roman and
the Egyptian festival of the resurrection
is to be explained, I do not pretend to
say.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Nature of Osiris.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Osiris a Corn-God.'/>
<head>§ 1. Osiris a Corn-God.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris in
one of his
aspects a
personification
of
the corn. Osiris a
child of
Sky and
Earth.
The legend
of the
dismemberment
of Osiris
points
to the
dismemberment
of human
beings,
perhaps of
the kings,
in the
character
of the
corn-spirit.</note>
The foregoing survey of the myth and ritual of Osiris may
suffice to prove that in one of his aspects the god was a
personification of the corn, which may be said to die and
come to life again every year. Through all the pomp and
glamour with which in later times the priests had invested
his worship, the conception of him as the corn-god comes
clearly out in the festival of his death and resurrection, which
was celebrated in the month of Khoiak and at a later period
in the month of Athyr. That festival appears to have been
essentially a festival of sowing, which properly fell at the
time when the husbandman actually committed the seed to
the earth. On that occasion an effigy of the corn-god,
moulded of earth and corn, was buried with funeral rites in
the ground in order that, dying there, he might come to life
again with the new crops. The ceremony was, in fact, a
charm to ensure the growth of the corn by sympathetic
magic, and we may conjecture that as such it was practised
in a simple form by every Egyptian farmer on his fields long
before it was adopted and transfigured by the priests in the
stately ritual of the temple. In the modern, but doubtless
ancient, Arab custom of burying <q>the Old Man,</q> namely,
a sheaf of wheat, in the harvest-field and praying that he
may return from the dead,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>.</note> we see the germ out of which the
worship of the corn-god Osiris was probably developed.
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
Earth.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</note> What more appropriate parentage could be invented
for the corn which springs from the ground that has been
fertilized by the water of heaven? It is true that the land
of Egypt owed its fertility directly to the Nile and not to
showers; but the inhabitants must have known or guessed
that the great river in its turn was fed by the rains which
fell in the far interior. Again, the legend that Osiris was
the first to teach men the use of corn<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</note> would be most
naturally told of the corn-god himself. Further, the story
that his mangled remains were scattered up and down the
land and buried in different places may be a mythical way
of expressing either the sowing or the winnowing of the
grain. The latter interpretation is supported by the tale
that Isis placed the severed limbs of Osiris on a corn-sieve.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 166.</note>
Or more probably the legend may be a reminiscence of a
custom of slaying a human victim, perhaps a representative
of the corn-spirit, and distributing his flesh or scattering his
ashes over the fields to fertilize them. In modern Europe
the figure of Death is sometimes torn in pieces, and the
fragments are then buried in the ground to make the crops
grow well,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, p. 250.</note> and in other parts of the world human victims
are treated in the same way.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the
Wild</hi>, i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> With regard to the ancient
Egyptians we have it on the authority of Manetho that they
used to burn red-haired men and scatter their ashes with
winnowing fans,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 73, compare
33.</note> and it is highly significant that this barbarous
sacrifice was offered by the kings at the grave of Osiris.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 88. 5. The
slaughter may have been performed by
the king with his own hand. On
Egyptian monuments the king is often
represented in the act of slaying
prisoners before a god. See A. Moret,
<hi rend='italic'>Du caractère religieux de la royauté
Pharaonique</hi> (Paris, 1902), pp. 179,
224; E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Similarly the kings of Ashantee and
Dahomey used often themselves to cut
the throats of the human victims. See
A. B. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>The Tshi-speaking Peoples
of the Gold Coast</hi> (London, 1887),
p. 162; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Ewe-speaking Peoples
of the Slave Coast</hi> (London, 1890),
pp. 125, 129.</note>
We may conjecture that the victims represented Osiris himself,
who was annually slain, dismembered, and buried in
their persons that he might quicken the seed in the earth.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Roman
and Greek
traditions
of the
dismemberment
of kings. Modern
Thracian
pretence
of killing
a man,
who is
sometimes
called a
king, for
the good of
the crops.</note>
Possibly in prehistoric times the kings themselves
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
played the part of the god and were slain and dismembered
in that character. Set as well as Osiris is said to have
been torn in pieces after a reign of eighteen days, which
was commemorated by an annual festival of the same
length.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scholia in Caesaris Germanici
Aratea</hi>, in F. Eyssenhardt's edition of
Martianus Capella, p. 408 (Leipsic,
1866).</note> According to one story Romulus, the first
king of Rome, was cut in pieces by the senators, who
buried the fragments of him in the ground;<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Rom.</hi> ii. 56. 4. Compare
Livy, i. 16. 4; Florus, i. 1. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Romulus</hi>, 27. Mr. A. B.
Cook was, I believe, the first to interpret
the story as a reminiscence of the
sacrifice of a king. See his article
<q>The European Sky-God,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xvi. (1905) pp. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> However, the
acute historian A. Schwegler long ago
maintained that the tradition rested on
some very ancient religious rite, which
was afterwards abolished or misunderstood,
and he rightly compared the
legendary deaths of Pentheus and
Orpheus (<hi rend='italic'>Römische Geschichte</hi>, Tübingen,
1853-1858, vol. i. pp. 534 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).
See further W. Otto, <q>Juno,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Philologus</hi>,
lxiv. (1905) pp. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and
the traditional day of his death, the seventh of July,
was celebrated with certain curious rites, which were
apparently connected with the artificial fertilization of the
fig.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, Greek legend told how Pentheus, king of
Thebes, and Lycurgus, king of the Thracian Edonians,
opposed the vine-god Dionysus, and how the impious
monarchs were rent in pieces, the one by the frenzied
Bacchanals, the other by horses.<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 43 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 1043
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Theocritus, xxvi.; Pausanias, ii.
2. 7; Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 5.
1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 132 and 184. The
destruction of Lycurgus by horses
seems to be mentioned only by Apollodorus.
As to Pentheus see especially
A. G. Bather, <q>The Problem of the
Bacchae,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic Studies</hi>,
xiv. (1904) pp. 244-263.</note> These Greek traditions
may well be distorted reminiscences of a custom of sacrificing
human beings, and especially divine kings, in the
character of Dionysus, a god who resembled Osiris in many
points and was said like him to have been torn limb from
limb.<note place='foot'>Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> vi. 165-205;
Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 17
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, p. 15 ed. Potter; Justin Martyr,
<hi rend='italic'>Apology</hi>, i. 54; Firmicus Maternus,
<hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum religionum</hi>, 6;
Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus Nationes</hi>, v. 19.
According to the Clementine <hi rend='italic'>Recognitiones</hi>,
x. 24 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Graeca</hi>,
i. 1434) Dionysus was torn in pieces
at Thebes, the very place of which
Pentheus was king. The description
of Euripides (<hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 1058 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>)
suggests that the human victim was tied
or hung to a pine-tree before being rent
to pieces. We are reminded of the effigy
of Attis which hung on the sacred
pine (above, vol. i. p. 267), and of
the image of Osiris which was made
out of a pine-tree and then buried in
the hollow of the trunk (below, p. 108).
The pine-tree on which Pentheus was
pelted by the Bacchanals before they
tore him limb from limb is said to have
been worshipped as if it were the god
himself by the Corinthians, who made
two images of Dionysus out of it
(Pausanias, ii. 2. 7). The tradition
points to an intimate connexion between
the tree, the god, and the human
victim.</note> We are told that in Chios men were rent in pieces
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
as a sacrifice to Dionysus;<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstinentia</hi>, ii. 55.
At Potniae in Boeotia a priest of
Dionysus is said to have been killed by
the drunken worshippers (Pausanias,
ix. 8. 2). He may have been sacrificed
in the character of the god.</note> and since they died the same
death as their god, it is reasonable to suppose that they
personated him. The story that the Thracian Orpheus was
similarly torn limb from limb by the Bacchanals seems to
indicate that he too perished in the character of the god whose
death he died.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De saltatione</hi>, 51; Plato,
<hi rend='italic'>Symposium</hi>, 7, p. 179 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>e</hi>; Pausanias,
ix. 30. 5; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> xi. 1-43; O.
Gruppe, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Orpheus,</q> in W. H.
Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und röm.
Mythologie</hi>, iii. 1165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> That Orpheus
died the death of the god has been
observed both in ancient and modern
times. See E. Rohde, <hi rend='italic'>Psyche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> (Tübingen
and Leipsic, 1903) ii. 118, note 2,
quoting Proclus on Plato; S. Reinach,
<q>La mort d'Orphée,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cultes, Mythes
et Religions</hi>, ii. (1906) pp. 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
According to Ovid, the Bacchanals
killed him with hoes, rakes, and
mattocks. Similarly in West Africa
human victims used to be killed with
spades and hoes and then buried in
a field which had just been tilled
(J. B. Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de
l'Ethiopie occidentale</hi>, Paris, 1732, i.
380). Such a mode of sacrifice points
to the identification of the human
victim with the fruits of the earth.</note> It is significant that the Thracian Lycurgus,
king of the Edonians, is said to have been put to death in
order that the ground, which had ceased to be fruitful, might
regain its fertility.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, iii. 5. 1.</note> In some Thracian villages at Carnival
time a custom is still annually observed, which may well be
a mitigation of an ancient practice of putting a man, perhaps
a king, to death in the character of Dionysus for the sake
of the crops. A man disguised in goatskins and fawnskins,
the livery of Dionysus, is shot at and falls down as dead.
A pretence is made of flaying his body and of mourning
over him, but afterwards he comes to life again. Further,
a plough is dragged about the village and seed is scattered,
while prayers are said that the wheat, rye, and barley may
be plentiful. One town (Viza), where these customs are
observed, was the capital of the old Thracian kings. In
another town (Kosti, near the Black Sea) the principal masker
is called the king. He wears goatskins or sheepskins, and is
attended by a boy who dispenses wine to the people. The
king himself carries seed, which he casts on the ground
before the church, after being invited to throw it on two
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
bands of married and unmarried men respectively. Finally,
he is stripped of the skins and thrown into the river.<note place='foot'>R. M. Dawkins, <q>The Modern
Carnival in Thrace and the Cult of
Dionysus,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic Studies</hi>,
xxvi. (1906) pp. 191-206. See further
<hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</hi>, i.
25 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Norwegian
tradition
of the
dismemberment
of a king,
Halfdan
the Black.
Frey, the
Scandinavian
god
of fertility,
buried at
Upsala.</note>
Further, we read of a Norwegian king, Halfdan the
Black, whose body was cut up and buried in different parts
of his kingdom for the sake of ensuring the fruitfulness
of the earth. He is said to have been drowned at the
age of forty through the breaking of the ice in spring.
What followed his death is thus related by the old Norse
historian Snorri Sturluson: <q>He had been the most
prosperous (literally, blessed with abundance) of all kings.
So greatly did men value him that when the news came
that he was dead and his body removed to Hringariki and
intended for burial there, the chief men from Raumariki and
Westfold and Heithmörk came and all requested that they
might take his body with them and bury it in their various
provinces; they thought that it would bring abundance to
those who obtained it. Eventually it was settled that the
body was distributed in four places. The head was laid in
a barrow at Steinn in Hringariki, and each party took away
their own share and buried it. All these barrows are called
Halfdan's barrows.</q><note place='foot'>Snorri Sturluson, <hi rend='italic'>Heimskringla,
Saga Halfdanar Svarta</hi>, ch. 9. I have
to thank Professor H. M. Chadwick
for referring me to this passage and
translating it for me. See also <hi rend='italic'>The
Stories of the Kings of Norway (Heimskringla)</hi>,
done into English by W.
Morris and E. Magnússon (London,
1893-1905), i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Halfdan the
Black was the father of Harold the
Fair-haired, king of Norway (860-933
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>). Professor Chadwick tells me
that, though the tradition as to the
death and mutilation of Halfdan was
not committed to writing for three
hundred years, he sees no reason to
doubt its truth. He also informs me
that the word translated <q>abundance</q>
means literally <q>the produce of the
season.</q> <q>Plenteous years</q> is the
rendering of Morris and Magnússon.</note> It should be remembered that this
Halfdan belonged to the family of the Ynglings, who traced
their descent from Frey, the great Scandinavian god of
fertility.<note place='foot'>As to the descent of Halfdan and
the Ynglings from Frey, see <hi rend='italic'>Heimskringla</hi>,
done into English by W.
Morris and E. Magnússon, i. 23-71
(<hi rend='italic'>The Saga Library</hi>, vol. iii.). With
regard to Frey, the god of fertility,
both animal and vegetable, see E. H.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologie der Germanen</hi>
(Strasburg, 1903), pp. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; P.
Hermann, <hi rend='italic'>Nordische Mythologie</hi> (Leipsic,
1903), pp. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Frey himself is said to have reigned as king of
Sweden at Upsala. The years of his reign were plenteous,
and the people laid the plenty to his account. So when he
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
died, they would not burn him, as it had been customary to
do with the dead before his time; but they resolved to
preserve his body, believing that, so long as it remained in
Sweden, the land would have abundance and peace. Therefore
they reared a great mound, and put him in it, and
sacrificed to him for plenty and peace ever afterwards.
And for three years after his death they poured the tribute
to him into the mound, as if he were alive; the gold they
poured in by one window, the silver by a second, and the
copper by a third.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Heimskringla</hi>, done into English
by W. Morris and E. Magnússon, i. 4,
22-24 (<hi rend='italic'>The Saga Library</hi>, vol. iii.).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Segera, a
magician
of Kiwai,
said to have
been cut up
after death
and the
pieces
buried in
gardens to
fertilize
them.</note>
The natives of Kiwai, an island lying off the mouth of
the Fly River in British New Guinea, tell of a certain
magician named Segera, who had sago for his totem.
When his son died, the death was set down to the magic
of an enemy, and the bereaved father was so angry that
by his spells he caused the whole crop of sago in the
country to fail; only in his own garden the sago grew as
luxuriantly as ever. When many had died of famine, the
people went to him and begged him to remove the spells
which he had cast on the sago palms, so that they might
eat food and live. The magician, touched with remorse and
pity, went round planting a sago shoot in every garden, and
the shoots flourished, sago was plentiful once more, and the
famine came to an end. When Segera was old and ill, he
told the people that he would soon die, but that, nevertheless,
he would cause their gardens to thrive. Accordingly,
he instructed them that when he was dead they should
cut him up and place pieces of his flesh in their gardens,
but his head was to be buried in his own garden. Of him
it is said that he outlived the ordinary age, and that no man
knew his father, but that he made the sago good and no
one was hungry any more. Old men who were alive a
few years ago affirmed that they had known Segera in their
youth, and the general opinion of the Kiwai people seems
to be that Segera died not more than two generations ago.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, ii. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
from information supplied by Dr. C.
G. Seligmann.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Apparently
widespread
custom
of dismembering
a king or
magician
and burying
the
pieces in
different
parts of the
kingdom.</note>
Taken all together, these legends point to a widespread
practice of dismembering the body of a king or magician
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
and burying the pieces in different parts of the country
in order to ensure the fertility of the ground and probably
also the fecundity of man and beast. Whether regarded as
the descendant of a god, as himself divine, or simply as a
mighty enchanter, the king was believed to radiate magical
virtue for the good of his subjects, quickening the seed in
the earth and in the womb. This radiation of reproductive
energy did not cease with his life; hence the people deemed
it essential to preserve his body as a pledge of the continued
prosperity of the country. It would be natural to
imagine that the spot where the dead king was buried
would enjoy a more than ordinary share of his blessed
influence, and accordingly disputes would almost inevitably
arise between different districts for the exclusive possession
of so powerful a talisman. These disputes could be settled
and local jealousies appeased by dividing the precious body
between the rival claimants, in order that all should benefit
in equal measure by its life-giving properties. This was
certainly done in Norway with the body of Halfdan the
Black, the descendant of the harvest-god Frey; it appears
to have been done with the body of Segera, the sago-magician
of Kiwai; and we may conjecture that in prehistoric
times it was done with the bodies of Egyptian
kings, who personated Osiris, the god of fertility in general
and of the corn in particular. At least such a practice
would account for the legend of the mangling of the god's
body and the distribution of the pieces throughout
Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In this
dismemberment
a special
virtue
seems to
have been
ascribed
to the
genital
organs.</note>
In this connexion the story that the genital member
of Osiris was missing when Isis pieced together his
mutilated body,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</note> may not be without significance. When
a Zulu medicine-man wishes to make the crops grow
well, he will take the body of a man who has died in
full vigour and cut minute portions of tissue from the foot,
the leg, the arm, the face, and the nail of a single finger
in order to compound a fertilizing medicine out of them.
But the most important part of the medicine consists
of the dead man's generative organs, which are removed
entire. All these pieces of the corpse are fried with herbs
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
on a slow fire, then ground to powder, and sown over the
fields.<note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Childhood</hi>
(London, 1906), p. 291.</note> We have seen that similarly the Egyptians scattered
the ashes of human victims by means of winnowing-fans;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>.</note>
and if my explanation of the practice is correct, it may well
have been that they, like the Zulus, attributed a special
power of reproduction to the genital organs, and therefore
carefully excised them from the body of the victim in order
to impart their virtue to the fields. I have conjectured that
a similar use was made of the severed portions of the priests
of Attis.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Egyptian
kings
probably
opposed the
custom and
succeeded
in abolishing
it.
Precautions
taken to
preserve
the bodies
of kings
from
mutilation.</note>
To an ancient Egyptian, with his firm belief in a personal
immortality dependent on the integrity of the body, the
prospect of mutilation after death must have been very
repugnant; and we may suppose that the kings offered a
strenuous resistance to the custom and finally succeeded in
abolishing it. They may have represented to the people
that they would attain their object better by keeping the
royal corpse intact than by frittering it away in small pieces.
Their subjects apparently acquiesced in the argument, or at
all events in the conclusion; yet the mountains of masonry
beneath which the old Egyptian kings lay buried may have
been intended to guard them from the superstitious devotion
of their friends quite as much as from the hostile designs of
their enemies, since both alike must have been under a
strong temptation to violate the sanctity of the grave in
order to possess themselves of bodies which were believed
to be endowed with magical virtue of the most tremendous
potency. In antiquity the safety of the state was often
believed to depend on the possession of a talisman, which
sometimes consisted of the bones of a king or hero. Hence
the graves of such persons were sometimes kept secret.<note place='foot'>See my notes on Pausanias, i. 28.
7 and viii. 47. 5 (vol. ii. pp. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
vol. iv. pp. 433 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
The violation of royal tombs by a conqueror was not a
mere insult: it was a deadly blow struck at the prosperity
of the kingdom. Hence Ashurbanipal carried off to Assyria
the bones of the kings of Elam, believing that thus he gave
their shades no repose and deprived them of food and
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
drink.<note place='foot'>R. F. Harper, <hi rend='italic'>Assyrian and Babylonian
Literature</hi> (New York, 1901),
p. 116; C. Fossey, <hi rend='italic'>La Magie Assyrienne</hi>
(Paris, 1902), pp. 34 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Moabites burned the bones of the king of
Edom into lime.<note place='foot'>Amos ii. 1.</note> Lysimachus is said to have opened the
graves of the kings of Epirus and scattered the bones of
the dead.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 9. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Graves of
kings and
chiefs in
Africa kept
secret. Burial-place
of
chiefs in
Fiji kept
secret.
Graves of
Melanesian
magicians
kept secret.</note>
With savage and barbarous tribes in like manner it is
not unusual to violate the sanctity of the tomb either for
the purpose of wreaking vengeance on the dead or more
commonly perhaps for the sake of gaining possession of the
bones and converting them to magical uses. Hence the
Mpongwe kings of the Gaboon region in West Africa are
buried secretly lest their heads should fall into the hands of
men of another tribe, who would make a powerful fetish out
of the brains.<note place='foot'>P. B. du Chaillu, <hi rend='italic'>Explorations
and Adventures in Equatorial Africa</hi>
(London, 1861), pp. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, in Togoland, West Africa, the kings
of the Ho tribe are buried with great secrecy in the forest,
and a false grave is made ostentatiously in the king's house.
None but his personal retainers and a single daughter know
where the king's real grave is. The intention of this secret
burial is to prevent enemies from digging up the corpse and
cutting off the head.<note place='foot'>J. Spieth, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ewe-Stämme</hi> (Berlin,
1906), p. 107.</note> <q>The heads of important chiefs in
the Calabar districts are usually cut off from the body on
burial and kept secretly for fear the head, and thereby the
spirit, of the dead chief, should be stolen from the town. If
it were stolen it would be not only a great advantage to its
new possessor, but a great danger to the chief's old town,
because he would know all the peculiar ju-ju relating to it.
For each town has a peculiar one, kept exceedingly secret,
in addition to the general ju-jus, and this secret one would
then be in the hands of the new owners of the spirit.</q><note place='foot'>Mary H. Kingsley, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in
West Africa</hi> (London, 1897), pp. 449
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In West African jargon the word
ju-ju means fetish or magic.</note> The
graves of Basuto chiefs are kept secret lest certain more or
less imaginary witches and wizards called <foreign rend='italic'>Baloi</foreign>, who haunt
tombs, should get possession of the bones and work evil
magic with them.<note place='foot'>Father Porte, <q>Les reminiscences
d'un missionnaire du Basutoland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxviii. (1896)
pp. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> As to the <foreign rend='italic'>Baloi</foreign>, see
A. Merensky, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
Süd-Afrikas</hi> (Berlin, 1875), pp. 138
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. Gottschling, <q>The Bawenda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) p. 375. For these two
references I have to thank Mr. E. S.
Hartland.</note> In the Thonga tribe of South Africa,
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
when a chief dies, he is buried secretly by night in a sacred
wood, and few people know the place of the grave. With
some clans of the tribe it is customary to level the mound
over the grave so that no sign whatever remains to show
where the body has been buried. This is said to be done
lest enemies should exhume the corpse and cut off the ears,
the diaphragm, and other parts in order to make powerful
war-charms out of them.<note place='foot'>Henri A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>The Life of a
South African Tribe</hi> (Neuchâtel, 1912-1913),
i. 387 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> By many tribes in Fiji <q>the
burial-place of their chief is kept a profound secret, lest
those whom he injured during his lifetime should revenge
themselves by digging up and insulting or even eating his
body. In some places the dead chief is buried in his own
house, and armed warriors of his mother's kin keep watch
night and day over his grave. After a time his bones are
taken up and carried by night to some far-away inaccessible
cave in the mountains, whose position is known only to a
few trustworthy men. Ladders are constructed to enable
them to reach the cave, and are taken down when the bones
have been deposited there. Many frightful stories are told
in connection with this custom, and it is certain that not
even decomposition itself avails to baulk the last revenge of
cannibals if they can find the grave. The very bones of
the dead chief are not secure from the revenge of those
whose friends he killed during his lifetime, or whom he
otherwise so exasperated by the tyrannous exercise of his
power as to fill their hearts with a deadly hate. In one
instance within my own knowledge, when the hiding-place
was discovered, the bones were taken away, scraped, and
stewed down into a horrible hell-broth.</q><note place='foot'>Lorimer Fison, <q>Notes on Fijian
Burial Customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, x. (1881) pp.
141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a
Melanesian dies who enjoyed a reputation for magical
powers in his lifetime, his friends will sometimes hold a
sham burial and keep the real grave secret for fear that
men might come and dig up the skull and bones to make
charms with them.<note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>
(Oxford, 1891), p. 269.</note>
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Among the
Koniags of
Alaska the
bodies of
dead
whalers
were cut
up and
used as
talismans.</note>
Beliefs and practices of this sort are by no means
confined to agricultural peoples. Among the Koniags of
Alaska <q>in ancient times the pursuit of the whale was
accompanied by numerous superstitious observances kept a
secret by the hunters. Lieutenant Davidof states that the
whalers preserved the bodies of brave or distinguished men
in secluded caves, and before proceeding upon a whale-hunt
would carry these dead bodies into a stream and then drink
of the water thus tainted. One famous whaler of Kadiak
who desired to flatter Baranof, the first chief manager of the
Russian colonies, said to him, <q>When you die I shall try to
steal your body,</q> intending thus to express his great respect
for Baranof. On the occasion of the death of a whaler his
fellows would cut the body into pieces, each man taking
one of them for the purpose of rubbing his spear-heads
therewith. These pieces were dried or otherwise preserved,
and were frequently taken into the canoes as talismans.</q><note place='foot'>Ivan Petroff, <hi rend='italic'>Report on the Population,
Industries, and Resources of
Alaska</hi>, p. 142. The account seems to
be borrowed from H. J. Holmberg, who
adds that pains were taken to preserve
the flesh from decay, <q>because they
believed that their own life depended
on it.</q> See H. J. Holmberg, <q>Über
die Völker des russischen Amerika,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae</hi>,
iv. (Helsingfors, 1856) p. 391.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Assimilation
of
human
victims to
the corn.</note>
To return to the human victims whose ashes the Egyptians
scattered with winnowing-fans,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>.</note> the red hair of these unfortunates
was probably significant. If I am right, the custom of
sacrificing such persons was not a mere way of wreaking
a national spite on fair-haired foreigners, whom the black-haired
Egyptians of old, like the black-haired Chinese of
modern times, may have regarded as red-haired devils. For
in Egypt the oxen which were sacrificed had also to be red;
a single black or white hair found on the beast would have
disqualified it for the sacrifice.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 31; Herodotus,
ii. 38.</note> If, as I conjecture, these
human sacrifices were intended to promote the growth of
the crops&mdash;and the winnowing of their ashes seems to
support this view&mdash;red-haired victims were perhaps selected
as best fitted to personate the spirit of the ruddy grain. For
when a god is represented by a living person, it is natural
that the human representative should be chosen on the
ground of his supposed resemblance to the divine original.
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
Hence the ancient Mexicans, conceiving the maize as a
personal being who went through the whole course of life
between seed-time and harvest, sacrificed new-born babes
when the maize was sown, older children when it had
sprouted, and so on till it was fully ripe, when they sacrificed
old men.<note place='foot'>Herrera, quoted by A. Bastian,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer des alten Amerika</hi>
(Berlin, 1878), ii. 639; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>General
History of the vast Continent and
Islands of America</hi>, translated by Capt.
J. Stevens (London, 1725-26), ii. 379
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (whose version of the passage is
inadequate). Compare Brasseur de
Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des nations civilisées
du Mexique et de l'Amérique
Centrale</hi> (Paris, 1857-59), i. 327, iii.
525.</note> A name for Osiris was the <q>crop</q> or
<q>harvest</q>;<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le mythe Osirien</hi>
(Paris, 1874-75), p. 188.</note> and the ancients sometimes explained him as
a personification of the corn.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, 2, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Defensores
eorum volunt addere physicam
rationem, frugum semina Osirim
dicentes esse, Isim terram, Tyfonem
calorem: et quia maturatae fruges
calore ad vitam hominum colliguntur
et divisae a terrae consortio separantur
et rursus adpropinquante hieme seminantur,
hanc volunt esse mortem
Osiridis, cum fruges recondunt, inventionem
vero, cum fruges genitali
terrae fomento conceptae annua rursus
coeperint procreatione generari.</foreign></q> Tertullian,
<hi rend='italic'>Adversus Marcionem</hi>, i. 13,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sic et Osiris quod semper sepelitur
et in vivido quaeritur et cum gaudio
invenitur, reciprocarum frugum et
vividorum elementorum et recidivi anni
fidem argumentantur</foreign>.</q> Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 65, οὕτω δὲ καὶ τοῖς πολλοῖς
καὶ φορτικοῖς ἐπιχειρήσομεν, εἴτε ταῖς
καθ᾽ ὤραν μεταβολαῖς τοῦ περιέχοντος
εἴτε ταῖς καρπῶν γενέσεσι καὶ σποραῖς
καὶ ἀρότοις χαίρουσι τὰ περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς
τούτους συνοικειοῦντες, καὶ λέγοντες
θάπτεσθαι μὲν Ὄσιριν ὅτε κρύπτεται τῇ
γῇ σπειρόμενος ὁ καρπός, αὖθις δ᾽ ἀναβιοῦσθαι
καὶ ἀναφαίνεσφαι ὅτε βλαστήσεως
ἀρχή. Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praeparatio
Evangelii</hi>, iii. 11. 31, ὁ δὲ Ὄσιρις παρ᾽
Αἰγυπτίοις τὴν κάρπιμον παρίστησι
δύναμιν, ἢν θρήνοις ἀπομειλίσσονται εἰς
γὴν ἀφανιζομένην ἐν τῷ σπόρῳ καὶ ὑφ᾽
ἡμῶν καταναλισκομένην εἰς τὰς τροφάς.
Athenagoras, <hi rend='italic'>Supplicatio pro Christianis</hi>,
22, pp. 112, 114 ed. J. C. T.
Otto, τὰ δὲ στοιχεῖα καὶ τὰ μόρια αὐτῶν
θεοποιοῦσιν, ἄλλοτε ἄλλα ὀνόματα αὐτοῖς
τιθέμενοι, τὴν μὲν τοῦ σίτου σπορὰν
Ὄσιριν (ὄφεν φασὶ μυστικῶς ἐπὶ τῇ
ἀνευρέσει τῶν μελῶν ἢ τῶν καρπῶν
ἐπιλεχθῆναι τῇ Ἴσιδι. Εὐρήκαμεν,
συγχαίρομεν). See also the passage of
Cornutus quoted above, vol. i. p. 229,
note 2.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Osiris a Tree-Spirit.'/>
<head>§ 2. Osiris a Tree-Spirit.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris as a
tree-spirit. His image
enclosed in
a pine-tree.</note>
But Osiris was more than a spirit of the corn; he was
also a tree-spirit, and this may perhaps have been his
primitive character, since the worship of trees is naturally
older in the history of religion than the worship of the
cereals. However that may have been, to an agricultural
people like the Egyptians, who depended almost wholly on
their crops, the corn-god was naturally a far more important
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
personage than the tree-god, and attracted a larger share of
their devotion. The character of Osiris as a tree-spirit was
represented very graphically in a ceremony described by
Firmicus Maternus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum religionum</hi>,
27.</note> A pine-tree having been cut down, the
centre was hollowed out, and with the wood thus excavated
an image of Osiris was made, which was then buried like a
corpse in the hollow of the tree. It is hard to imagine how
the conception of a tree as tenanted by a personal being
could be more plainly expressed. The image of Osiris thus
made was kept for a year and then burned, exactly as was
done with the image of Attis which was attached to the
pine-tree.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 267, 277.</note> The ceremony of cutting the tree, as described
by Firmicus Maternus, appears to be alluded to by Plutarch.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 21, αἰνῶ
δὲ τομὴν ξύλου καὶ σχίσιν λίνου καὶ χοὰς
χεομένας, διὰ τὸ πολλὰ τῶν μυστικῶν
ἀναμεμίχθαι τούτοις. Again, <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi> 42,
τὸ δὲ ξύλον ἐν ταῖς λεγομέναις Ὀσίριδος
ταφαῖς τέμνοντες κατασκευάζουσι λάρνακα
μηνοειδῆ.</note>
It was probably the ritual counterpart of the mythical discovery
of the body of Osiris enclosed in the <hi rend='italic'>erica</hi>-tree.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The setting
up of the
<foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign> pillar
at the great
festival of
Osiris in
the month
of Khoiak. The setting
up of the
pillar may
have been
an emblem
of the
god's resurrection.</note>
Now we know from the monuments that at Busiris,
Memphis, and elsewhere the great festival of Osiris closed
on the thirtieth of Khoiak with the setting up of a remarkable
pillar known as the <foreign rend='italic'>tatu</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>tat</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>tet</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>dad</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign>. This was
a column with four or five cross-bars, like superposed capitals,
at the top. The whole roughly resembled a telegraph-post
with the cross-pieces which support the wires. Sometimes
on the monuments a human form is given to the pillar by
carving a grotesque face on it, robing the lower part, crowning
the top with the symbols of Osiris, and adding two arms
which hold two other characteristic emblems of the god, the
crook and the scourge or flail. On a Theban tomb the king
himself, assisted by his relations and a priest, is represented
hauling at the ropes by which the pillar is being raised,
while the queen looks on and her sixteen daughters accompany
the ceremony with the music of rattles and sistrums.
Again, in the hall of the Osirian mysteries at Abydos the
King Sety I. and the goddess Isis are depicted raising the
column between them. In Egyptian theology the pillar was
interpreted as the backbone of Osiris, and whatever its meaning
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
may have been, it was one of the holiest symbols of the
national religion. It might very well be a conventional way
of representing a tree stripped of its leaves; and if Osiris was
a tree-spirit, the bare trunk and branches might naturally be
described as his backbone. The setting up of the column
would thus, as several modern scholars believe, shadow forth
the resurrection of the god, and the importance of the
occasion would explain and justify the prominent part
which the king appears to have taken in the ceremony.<note place='foot'>As to the <foreign rend='italic'>tet</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign> pillar and its
erection at the festival see H. Brugsch
in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für ägyptische Sprache
und Alterthumskunde</hi>, 1881, pp. 84,
96; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie der
alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 618; A. Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben im
Altertum</hi>, pp. 377 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die
ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 22, 64; C. P.
Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Egyptian Religion</hi>
(London, 1882), pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Sir J.
Gardiner Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London,
1878), iii. pp. 67, note 3, and 82;
A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi>, pp. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. Maspero,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient
Classique</hi>, i. 130 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Moret,
<hi rend='italic'>Du caractère religieux de la royauté
Pharaonique</hi>, p. 153, note 1; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mystères Égyptiens</hi>, pp. 12-16; E. A.
Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>,
ii. 122, 124, <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 6, 37, 48,
51 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Miss Margaret A. Murray,
<hi rend='italic'>The Osireion at Abydos</hi>, pp. 27, 28;
Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2, p. 70. In a letter to me (dated
8th December, 1910) my colleague Professor
P. E. Newberry tells me that he
believes Osiris to have been originally
a cedar-tree god imported into Egypt
from the Lebanon, and he regards the
<foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign> pillar as a lopped cedar-tree. The
flail, as a symbol of Osiris, he believes to
be the instrument used to collect incense.
A similar flail is used by peasants in
Crete to extract the ladanum gum from
the shrubs. See P. de Tournefort,
<hi rend='italic'>Relation d'un Voyage du Levant</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1718), i. 29, with the
plate. For this reference I am indebted
to Professor Newberry.</note> It
is to be noted that in the myth of Osiris the <foreign rend='italic'>erica</foreign>-tree which
shot up and enclosed his dead body, was cut down by a
king and turned by him into a pillar of his house.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 15. See
above, p. 9.</note> We
can hardly doubt, therefore, that this incident of the legend
was supposed to be dramatically set forth in the erection of
the <foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign> column by the king. Like the similar custom of
cutting a pine-tree and fastening an image to it in the
rites of Attis, the ceremony may have belonged to that class
of customs of which the bringing in of the May-pole is
among the most familiar. The association of the king and
queen of Egypt with the <foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign> pillar reminds us of the association
of a King and Queen of May with the May-pole.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 88-90.</note> The
resemblance may be more than superficial.
</p>

<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris
associated
with the
pine, the
sycamore,
the
tamarisk,
and the
acacia.</note>
In the hall of Osiris at Denderah the coffin containing
the hawk-headed mummy of the god is clearly depicted as
enclosed within a tree, apparently a conifer, the trunk and
branches of which are seen above and below the coffin.<note place='foot'>A. Mariette-Bey, <hi rend='italic'>Dendérah</hi>, iv.
pl. 66.</note>
The scene thus corresponds closely both to the myth and
to the ceremony described by Firmicus Maternus. In
another scene at Denderah a tree of the same sort is represented
growing between the dead and the reviving Osiris, as
if on purpose to indicate that the tree was the symbol of
the divine resurrection.<note place='foot'>A. Mariette-Bey, <hi rend='italic'>Dendérah</hi>, iv.
pl. 72. Compare E. Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le
mythe Osirien</hi>, pp. 194, 196, who regards
the tree as a conifer. But it is
perhaps a tamarisk.</note> A pine-cone often appears on the
monuments as an offering presented to Osiris, and a manuscript
of the Louvre speaks of the cedar as sprung from him.<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 195, 197.</note>
The sycamore and the tamarisk were also his trees. In
inscriptions he is spoken of as residing in them;<note place='foot'>S. Birch, in Sir J. G. Wilkinson's
<hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi> (London, 1878), iii. 84.</note> and in
tombs his mother Nut is often portrayed standing in the
midst of a sycamore-tree and pouring a libation for the
benefit of the dead.<note place='foot'>Sir J. G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii.
62-64; E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods
of the Egyptians</hi>, ii. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G.
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples
de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 185.</note> In one of the Pyramid Texts we
read, <q>Hail to thee, Sycamore, which enclosest the god</q>;<note place='foot'>J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>Development of
Religion and Thought in Ancient
Egypt</hi> (London, 1912), p. 28.</note>
and in certain temples the statue of Osiris used to be
placed for seven days upon branches of sycamores. The
explanation appended in the sacred texts declares that the
placing of the image on the tree was intended to recall
the seven months passed by Osiris in the womb of his
mother Nut, the goddess of the sycamore.<note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Kings and Gods of
Egypt</hi> (New York and London, 1912),
p. 83.</note> The rite recalls
the story that Adonis was born after ten months' gestation
from a myrrh-tree.<note place='foot'>Above, vol. i. pp. 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Further, in a sepulchre at How
(Diospolis Parva) a tamarisk is depicted overshadowing
the tomb of Osiris, while a bird is perched among the
branches with the significant legend <q>the soul of Osiris,</q><note place='foot'>Sir J. G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii.
349 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und
aegyptisches Leben im Altertum</hi>, p. 368;
H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie
der alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 621.</note>
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
showing that the spirit of the dead god was believed to
haunt his sacred tree.<note place='foot'>We may compare a belief of some
of the Californian Indians that the owl
is the guardian spirit and deity of the
<q>California big tree,</q> and that it is
equally unlucky to fell the tree or to
shoot the bird. See S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes
of California</hi> (Washington, 1877), p.
398. When a Maori priest desires to
protect the life or soul (<foreign rend='italic'>hau</foreign>) of a tree
against the insidious arts of magicians,
he sets a bird-snare in the tree, and
the first bird caught in the snare, or
its right wing, embodies the life or
soul of the tree. Accordingly the priest
recites appropriate spells over the bird
or its wing and hides it away in the
forest. After that no evil-disposed
magician can hurt the tree, since its
life or soul is not in it but hidden away
in the forest. See Elsdon Best,
<q>Spiritual Concepts of the Maori,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Polynesian Society</hi>, ix.
(1900) p. 195. Thus the bird or its
wing is the depository of the external
soul of the tree. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Balder the
Beautiful</hi>, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, in the series of sculptures
which illustrate the mystic history of Osiris in the great
temple of Isis at Philae, a tamarisk is figured with two men
pouring water on it. The accompanying inscription leaves
no doubt, says Brugsch, that the verdure of the earth was
believed to be connected with the verdure of the tree, and
that the sculpture refers to the grave of Osiris at Philae, of
which Plutarch tells us that it was overshadowed by a <foreign rend='italic'>methide</foreign>
plant, taller than any olive-tree. This sculpture, it may be
observed, occurs in the same chamber in which the god is
represented as a corpse with ears of corn springing from
him.<note place='foot'>Sir J. G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii.
349 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und
Mythologie der alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 621;
R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di Mitologia
Egizia</hi>, tav. cclxiii.; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, 20. In this passage of Plutarch
it has been proposed by G. Parthey
to read μυρίκης (tamarisk) for μηθίδης
(<foreign rend='italic'>methide</foreign>), and the conjecture appears
to be accepted by Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi></note> In inscriptions he is referred to as <q>the one in the
tree,</q> <q>the solitary one in the acacia,</q> and so forth.<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le mythe Osirien</hi>,
p. 191.</note> On
the monuments he sometimes appears as a mummy covered
with a tree or with plants;<note place='foot'>E. Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 188.</note> and trees are represented growing
from his grave.<note place='foot'>R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di
Mitologia Egizia</hi>, tav. ccciv.; G.
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples
de l'Orient Classique</hi>, ii. 570, fig.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris in
relation to
fruit-trees,
wells, the
vine, and
ivy.</note>
It accords with the character of Osiris as a tree-spirit
that his worshippers were forbidden to injure fruit-trees, and
with his character as a god of vegetation in general that
they were not allowed to stop up wells of water, which are
so important for the irrigation of hot southern lands.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35. One
of the points in which the myths of
Isis and Demeter agree is that both
goddesses in the search for the loved
and lost one are said to have sat down,
sad at heart and weary, on the edge of
a well. Hence those who had been
initiated at Eleusis were forbidden to
sit on a well. See Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, 15; Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>,
98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Pausanias, i. 39. 1; Apollodorus,
<hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, i. 5. 1; Nicander,
<hi rend='italic'>Theriaca</hi>, 486; Clement of Alexandria,
<hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 20, p. 16 ed. Potter.</note>
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
According to one legend, he taught men to train the vine
to poles, to prune its superfluous foliage, and to extract
the juice of the grape.<note place='foot'>Tibullus, i. 7. 33-36; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 17. 1, i. 20. 4.</note> In the papyrus of Nebseni, written
about 1550 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, Osiris is depicted sitting in a shrine, from
the roof of which hang clusters of grapes;<note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and
the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 38, 39.</note> and in the
papyrus of the royal scribe Nekht we see the god enthroned
in front of a pool, from the banks of which a luxuriant vine,
with many bunches of grapes, grows towards the green face
of the seated deity.<note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
19, 45, with frontispiece.</note> The ivy was sacred to him, and was
called his plant because it is always green.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 17. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Osiris a God of Fertility.'/>
<head>§ 3. Osiris a God of Fertility.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris
perhaps
conceived
as a god of
fertility in
general.</note>
As a god of vegetation Osiris was naturally conceived
as a god of creative energy in general, since men at a certain
stage of evolution fail to distinguish between the reproductive
powers of animals and of plants. Hence a striking feature
in his worship was the coarse but expressive symbolism by
which this aspect of his nature was presented to the eye not
merely of the initiated but of the multitude. At his festival
women used to go about the villages singing songs in his
praise and carrying obscene images of him which they set
in motion by means of strings.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 48; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 12, 18, 36, 51; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 21. 5, i. 22. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iv. 6. 3.</note> The custom was probably
a charm to ensure the growth of the crops. A similar image
of him, decked with all the fruits of the earth, is said to have
stood in a temple before a figure of Isis,<note place='foot'>Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refutatio omnium
haeresium</hi>, v. 7, p. 144 ed. Duncker
and Schneidewin.</note> and in the chambers
dedicated to him at Philae the dead god is portrayed lying
on his bier in an attitude which indicates in the plainest way
that even in death his generative virtue was not extinct but
only suspended, ready to prove a source of life and fertility
to the world when the opportunity should offer.<note place='foot'>A. Mariette-Bey, <hi rend='italic'>Dendérah</hi>, iv.
plates 66, 68, 69, 70, 88, 89, 90. Compare
R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di
Mitologia Egizia</hi>, tavv. cclxxi., cclxxii.,
cclxxvi., cclxxxv., cclxxxvi., cclxxxvii.,
cclxxxix., ccxc.; E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>, ii. 132,
136, 137.</note> Hymns
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
addressed to Osiris contain allusions to this important side
of his nature. In one of them it is said that the world
waxes green in triumph through him; and another declares,
<q>Thou art the father and mother of mankind, they live on
thy breath, they subsist on the flesh of thy body.</q><note place='foot'>Miss Margaret A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The
Osireion at Abydos</hi>, p. 27.</note> We
may conjecture that in this paternal aspect he was supposed,
like other gods of fertility, to bless men and women with
offspring, and that the processions at his festival were
intended to promote this object as well as to quicken the
seed in the ground. It would be to misjudge ancient
religion to denounce as lewd and profligate the emblems
and the ceremonies which the Egyptians employed for the
purpose of giving effect to this conception of the divine
power. The ends which they proposed to themselves in
these rites were natural and laudable; only the means they
adopted to compass them were mistaken. A similar fallacy
induced the Greeks to adopt a like symbolism in their
Dionysiac festivals, and the superficial but striking resemblance
thus produced between the two religions has perhaps
more than anything else misled inquirers, both ancient and
modern, into identifying worships which, though certainly
akin in nature, are perfectly distinct and independent in
origin.<note place='foot'>That the Greek Dionysus was
nothing but a slightly disguised form
of the Egyptian Osiris has been held
by Herodotus in ancient and by Mr.
P. Foucart in modern times. See
Herodotus, ii. 49; P. Foucart, <hi rend='italic'>Le
culte de Dionysos en Attique</hi> (Paris,
1904) (<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de l'Académie des
Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</hi>, xxxvii.).</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Osiris a God of the Dead.'/>
<head>§ 4. Osiris a God of the Dead.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>As god of
the corn
Osiris
came to be
viewed as
the god of
the resurrection.</note>
We have seen that in one of his aspects Osiris was the
ruler and judge of the dead.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> To a people like the Egyptians,
who not only believed in a life beyond the grave but actually
spent much of their time, labour, and money in preparing
for it, this office of the god must have appeared hardly, if
at all, less important than his function of making the earth
to bring forth its fruits in due season. We may assume
that in the faith of his worshippers the two provinces of the
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
god were intimately connected. In laying their dead in
the grave they committed them to his keeping who could
raise them from the dust to life eternal, even as he caused
the seed to spring from the ground. Of that faith the corn-stuffed
effigies of Osiris found in Egyptian tombs furnish an
eloquent and unequivocal testimony.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> They were at once
an emblem and an instrument of resurrection. Thus from
the sprouting of the grain the ancient Egyptians drew an
augury of human immortality. They are not the only
people who have built the same far-reaching hopes on the
same slender foundation. <q>Thou fool, that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare
grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: but
God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every
seed his own body. So also is the resurrection of the dead.
It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: it is
sown in weakness; it is raised in power: it is sown a
natural body; it is raised a spiritual body.</q><note place='foot'>1 Corinthians xv. 36-38, 42-44.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Great
popularity
of the
worship
of Osiris.</note>
A god who thus fed his people with his own broken
body in this life, and who held out to them a promise of a
blissful eternity in a better world hereafter, naturally reigned
supreme in their affections. We need not wonder, therefore,
that in Egypt the worship of the other gods was overshadowed
by that of Osiris, and that while they were
revered each in his own district, he and his divine partner
Isis were adored in all.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 42. Compare E.
A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the
Egyptians</hi>, ii. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>,
i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Isis.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Multifarious
attributes
of Isis.</note>
The original meaning of the goddess Isis is still more
difficult to determine than that of her brother and husband
Osiris. Her attributes and epithets were so numerous that
in the hieroglyphics she is called <q>the many-named,</q> <q>the
thousand-named,</q> and in Greek inscriptions <q>the myriad-named.</q><note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie
der alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 645; W.
Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones
Selectae</hi>, vol. ii. p. 433, No.
695; <hi rend='italic'>Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,
iii. p. 1232, No. 4941. Compare H.
Dessau, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</hi>,
vol. ii. Pars i. p. 179, No. 4376 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.
In Egyptian her name is <foreign rend='italic'>Hest</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Ast</foreign>,
but the derivation and meaning of the
name are unknown. See A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>The Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians</hi>, pp. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The late eminent Dutch scholar C. P. Tiele
confessed candidly that <q>it is now impossible to tell precisely
to what natural phenomena the character of Isis at
first referred.</q> Yet he adds, <q>Originally she was a goddess
of fecundity.</q><note place='foot'>C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>History of Egyptian
Religion</hi> (London, 1882), p. 57.</note> Similarly Dr. Budge writes that <q>Isis was
the great and beneficent goddess and mother, whose influence
and love pervaded all heaven and earth and the abode of
the dead, and she was the personification of the great
feminine, creative power which conceived, and brought forth
every living creature and thing, from the gods in heaven to
man on the earth, and to the insect on the ground; what
she brought forth she protected, and cared for, and fed, and
nourished, and she employed her life in using her power
graciously and successfully, not only in creating new beings
but in restoring those that were dead. She was, besides
these things, the highest type of a faithful and loving wife
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
and mother, and it was in this capacity that the Egyptians
honoured and worshipped her most.</q><note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of
the Egyptians</hi>, ii. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>How Isis
resembled
yet differed
from the
Mother
Goddesses
of Asia.
Isis
perhaps
originally
a goddess
of the corn.</note>
Thus in her character of a goddess of fecundity Isis
answered to the great mother goddesses of Asia, though she
differed from them in the chastity and fidelity of her conjugal
life; for while they were unmarried and dissolute, she had a
husband and was a true wife to him as well as an affectionate
mother to their son. Hence her beautiful Madonna-like
figure reflects a more refined state of society and of morals
than the coarse, sensual, cruel figures of Astarte, Anaitis,
Cybele, and the rest of that crew. A clear trace, indeed, of
an ethical standard very different from our own lingers in
her double relation of sister and wife to Osiris; but in most
other respects she is rather late than primitive, the full-blown
flower rather than the seed of a long religious development.
The attributes ascribed to her were too various to be all
her own. They were graces borrowed from many lesser
deities, sweets rifled from a thousand humbler plants to
feed the honey of her superb efflorescence. Yet in her
complex nature it is perhaps still possible to detect the
original nucleus round which by a slow process of accretion
the other elements gathered. For if her brother and husband
Osiris was in one of his aspects the corn-god, as we have seen
reason to believe, she must surely have been the corn-goddess.
There are at least some grounds for thinking so. For if we
may trust Diodorus Siculus, whose authority appears to have
been the Egyptian historian Manetho, the discovery of wheat
and barley was attributed to Isis, and at her festivals stalks
of these grains were carried in procession to commemorate
the boon she had conferred on men.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 14. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Eusebius (<hi rend='italic'>Praeparatio Evangelii</hi>, iii.
3) quotes from Diodorus a long
passage on the early religion of
Egypt, prefacing it with the remark
that Diodorus's account of the subject
was more concise than that of
Manetho.</note> A further detail is
added by Augustine. He says that Isis made the discovery
of barley at the moment when she was sacrificing to the
common ancestors of her husband and herself, all of whom
had been kings, and that she showed the newly discovered
ears of barley to Osiris and his councillor Thoth or
Mercury, as Roman writers called him. That is why,
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
adds Augustine, they identify Isis with Ceres.<note place='foot'>Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, viii.
27. Tertullian says that Isis wore a
wreath of the corn she had discovered
(<hi rend='italic'>De corona</hi>, 7).</note> Further,
at harvest-time, when the Egyptian reapers had cut the first
stalks, they laid them down and beat their breasts, wailing
and calling upon Isis.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 14. 2.</note> The custom has been already explained
as a lament for the corn-spirit slain under the sickle.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, and vol. i. p. 232.</note>
Amongst the epithets by which Isis is designated in the inscriptions
are <q>Creatress of green things,</q> <q>Green goddess,
whose green colour is like unto the greenness of the earth,</q>
<q>Lady of Bread,</q> <q>Lady of Beer,</q> <q>Lady of Abundance.</q><note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie
der alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 647;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, ii. 277.</note>
According to Brugsch she is <q>not only the creatress of the
fresh verdure of vegetation which covers the earth, but is
actually the green corn-field itself, which is personified as a
goddess.</q><note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 649. Compare
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of
the Egyptians</hi>, ii. 216.</note> This is confirmed by her epithet <foreign rend='italic'>Sochit</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Sochet</foreign>,
meaning <q>a corn-field,</q> a sense which the word still retains
in Coptic.<note place='foot'>H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi></note> The Greeks conceived of Isis as a corn-goddess,
for they identified her with Demeter.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 59, 156; Diodorus
Siculus, i. 13, 25, 95; Apollodorus,
<hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, ii. 1. 3; J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol.
on Lycophron</hi>, 212. See further W.
Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Isis,</q> in W. H. Roscher's
<hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und röm.
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 443 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In a Greek epigram
she is described as <q>she who has given birth to the fruits of
the earth,</q> and <q>the mother of the ears of corn</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Anthologia Planudea</hi>, cclxiv. 1.</note> and in
a hymn composed in her honour she speaks of herself as
<q>queen of the wheat-field,</q> and is described as <q>charged with
the care of the fruitful furrow's wheat-rich path.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epigrammata Graeca ex lapidibus
conlecta</hi>, ed. G. Kaibel (Berlin, 1878),
No. 1028, pp. 437 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, ed.
E. Abel (Leipsic and Prague, 1885),
pp. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Accordingly,
Greek or Roman artists often represented her with ears
of corn on her head or in her hand.<note place='foot'>W. Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 448 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Refinement
and spiritualization
of Isis in
later times:
the popularity
of
her worship
in the
Roman
empire. Resemblance
of
Isis to the
Madonna.</note>
Such, we may suppose, was Isis in the olden time, a
rustic Corn-Mother adored with uncouth rites by Egyptian
swains. But the homely features of the clownish goddess
could hardly be traced in the refined, the saintly form which,
spiritualized by ages of religious evolution, she presented to
her worshippers of after days as the true wife, the tender
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
mother, the beneficent queen of nature, encircled with the
nimbus of moral purity, of immemorial and mysterious
sanctity. Thus chastened and transfigured she won many
hearts far beyond the boundaries of her native land. In that
welter of religions which accompanied the decline of national
life in antiquity her worship was one of the most popular at
Rome and throughout the empire. Some of the Roman
emperors themselves were openly addicted to it.<note place='foot'>Otho often celebrated, or at least
attended, the rites of Isis, clad in a
linen garment (Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Otho</hi>, 12).
Commodus did the same, with shaven
head, carrying the effigy of Anubis.
See Lampridius, <hi rend='italic'>Commodus</hi>, 9; Spartianus,
<hi rend='italic'>Pescennius Niger</hi>, 6; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Caracallus</hi>,
9.</note> And however
the religion of Isis may, like any other, have been often
worn as a cloak by men and women of loose life, her rites
appear on the whole to have been honourably distinguished
by a dignity and composure, a solemnity and decorum well
fitted to soothe the troubled mind, to ease the burdened heart.
They appealed therefore to gentle spirits, and above all to
women, whom the bloody and licentious rites of other
Oriental goddesses only shocked and repelled. We need
not wonder, then, that in a period of decadence, when
traditional faiths were shaken, when systems clashed, when
men's minds were disquieted, when the fabric of empire
itself, once deemed eternal, began to show ominous rents
and fissures, the serene figure of Isis with her spiritual
calm, her gracious promise of immortality, should have
appeared to many like a star in a stormy sky, and should
have roused in their breasts a rapture of devotion not unlike
that which was paid in the Middle Ages to the Virgin
Mary. Indeed her stately ritual, with its shaven and
tonsured priests, its matins and vespers, its tinkling music,
its baptism and aspersions of holy water, its solemn processions,
its jewelled images of the Mother of God, presented
many points of similarity to the pomps and ceremonies of
Catholicism.<note place='foot'>L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1881-1883), ii. 373-385; J.
Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>
(Leipsic, 1885), iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 77-81; E. Renan,
<hi rend='italic'>Marc-Aurèle et la fin du Monde Antique</hi>
(Paris, 1882), pp. 570 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Reville,
<hi rend='italic'>La religion romaine à Rome sous les
Sévères</hi> (Paris, 1886), pp. 54-61; G.
Lafaye, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire du culte des divinités
d'Alexandrie</hi> (Paris, 1884); E. Meyer
and W. Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Isis,</q> in W. H.
Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und röm.
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 360 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; S. Dill,
<hi rend='italic'>Roman Society in the Last Century of
the Western Empire</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1899),
pp. 79 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 85 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Roman Society
from Nero to Marcus Aurelius</hi> (London,
1904), pp. 560 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The chief
passage on the worship of Isis in the
West is the eleventh book of Apuleius's
<hi rend='italic'>Metamorphoses</hi>. On the reputation
which the goddess enjoyed as a healer
of the sick see Diodorus Siculus, i.
25; W. Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 521
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The divine partner of Isis in
later times, especially outside of
Egypt, was Serapis, that is Osiris-Apis
(<foreign rend='italic'>Asar-Ḥāpi</foreign>), the sacred Apis bull
of Memphis, identified after death with
Osiris. His oldest sanctuary was at
Memphis (Pausanias, i. 18. 4), and
there was one at Babylon in the time
of Alexander the Great (Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi>, 76; Arrian, <hi rend='italic'>Anabasis</hi>, vii.
26). Ptolemy I. or II. built a great and
famous temple in his honour at Alexandria,
where he set up an image of
the god which was commonly said
to have been imported from Sinope
in Pontus. See Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Histor.</hi> iv.
83 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 27-29;
Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> iv.
48, p. 42 ed. Potter. In after ages
the institution of the worship of Serapis
was attributed to this Ptolemy, but all
that the politic Macedonian monarch
appears to have done was to assimilate
the Egyptian Osiris to the Greek Pluto,
and so to set up a god whom Egyptians
and Greeks could unite in worshipping.
Serapis gradually assumed the attributes
of Aesculapius, the Greek god of healing,
in addition to those of Pluto, the
Greek god of the dead. See G. Lafaye,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire du culte des divinités d'Alexandrie</hi>,
pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Herodots zweites Buch</hi>, p. 589; E.
A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the
Egyptians</hi>, ii. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; A. Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The resemblance need not be purely accidental.
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
Ancient Egypt may have contributed its share
to the gorgeous symbolism of the Catholic Church as well
as to the pale abstractions of her theology.<note place='foot'>The resemblance of Isis to the
Virgin Mary has often been pointed
out. See W. Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Isis,</q>
in W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech.
und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 428 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Certainly in
art the figure of Isis suckling the infant Horus is so like
that of the Madonna and child that it has sometimes
received the adoration of ignorant Christians.<note place='foot'>W. Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 430 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> And to
Isis in her later character of patroness of mariners the
Virgin Mary perhaps owes her beautiful epithet of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Stella
Maris</foreign>, <q>Star of the Sea,</q> under which she is adored by
tempest-tossed sailors.<note place='foot'>Th. Trede, <hi rend='italic'>Das Heidentum in der
römischen Kirche</hi> (Gotha, 1889-1891),
iii. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The attributes of a marine deity
may have been bestowed on Isis by the sea-faring Greeks
of Alexandria. They are quite foreign to her original
character and to the habits of the Egyptians, who had no
love of the sea.<note place='foot'>On this later aspect of Isis see
W. Drexler, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 474 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On this hypothesis Sirius, the bright star
of Isis, which on July mornings rises from the glassy waves
of the eastern Mediterranean, a harbinger of halcyon weather
to mariners, was the true <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Stella Maris</foreign>, <q>the Star of the
Sea.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Osiris and the Sun.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris interpreted
as the sun
by many
modern
writers.</note>
Osiris has been sometimes interpreted as the sun-god;
and in modern times this view has been held by so many
distinguished writers that it deserves a brief examination.
If we inquire on what evidence Osiris has been identified
with the sun or the sun-god, it will be found on analysis
to be minute in quantity and dubious, where it is not
absolutely worthless, in quality. The diligent Jablonski, the
first modern scholar to collect and sift the testimony of
classical writers on Egyptian religion, says that it can be
shown in many ways that Osiris is the sun, and that he
could produce a cloud of witnesses to prove it, but that it is
needless to do so, since no learned man is ignorant of the
fact.<note place='foot'>P. E. Jablonski, <hi rend='italic'>Pantheon Aegyptiorum</hi>
(Frankfort, 1750-1752), i. 125
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Of the writers whom he condescends to quote, the
only two who expressly identify Osiris with the sun are
Diodorus and Macrobius. The passage in Diodorus runs
thus:<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 11. 1.</note> <q>It is said that the aboriginal inhabitants of Egypt,
looking up to the sky, and smitten with awe and wonder at
the nature of the universe, supposed that there were two
gods, eternal and primaeval, the sun and the moon, of whom
they named the sun Osiris and the moon Isis.</q> Even if
Diodorus's authority for this statement is Manetho, as there
is some ground for believing,<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, note 2.</note> little or no weight can be
attached to it. For it is plainly a philosophical, and therefore
a late, explanation of the first beginnings of Egyptian
religion, reminding us of Kant's familiar saying about
the starry heavens and the moral law rather than of the
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
rude traditions of a primitive people. Jablonski's second
authority, Macrobius, is no better, but rather worse. For
Macrobius was the father of that large family of mythologists
who resolve all or most gods into the sun. According
to him Mercury was the sun, Mars was the sun, Janus
was the sun, Saturn was the sun, so was Jupiter, also
Nemesis, likewise Pan, and so on through a great part of
the pantheon.<note place='foot'>See Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, bk. i.</note> It was natural, therefore, that he should
identify Osiris with the sun,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 21. 11.</note> but his reasons for doing so
are exceedingly slight. He refers to the ceremonies of
alternate lamentation and joy as if they reflected the
vicissitudes of the great luminary in his course through the
sky. Further, he argues that Osiris must be the sun
because an eye was one of his symbols. It is true that
an eye was a symbol of Osiris,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 10 and
51; Sir J. G. Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1878), iii. 353; R. V.
Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di Mitologia
Egizia</hi>, pp. 782 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. A. Wallis
Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>,
ii. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>Development
of Religion and Thought in
Ancient Egypt</hi>, pp. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Strictly
speaking, the eye was the eye of Horus,
which the dutiful son sacrificed in
behalf of his father Osiris. <q>This act
of filial devotion, preserved to us in
the Pyramid Texts, made the already
sacred Horus-eye doubly revered in
the tradition and feeling of the
Egyptians. It became the symbol
of all sacrifice; every gift or offering
might be called a <q>Horus-eye,</q>
especially if offered to the dead. Excepting
the sacred beetle, or scarab,
it became the commonest and the
most revered symbol known to
Egyptian religion, and the myriads
of eyes, wrought in blue or green
glaze, or even cut from costly stone,
which fill our museum collections, and
are brought home by thousands by the
modern tourist, are survivals of this
ancient story of Horus and his devotion
to his father</q> (J. H. Breasted,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 31).</note> and it is also true that the
sun was often called <q>the eye of Horus</q>;<note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of
the Egyptians</hi>, i. 467; A. Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 8.</note> yet the coincidence
hardly suffices to establish the identity of the two
deities. The opinion that Osiris was the sun is also
mentioned, but not accepted, by Plutarch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 52.</note> and it is referred
to by Firmicus Maternus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum religionum</hi>,
8.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The later
identification
of
Osiris with
Ra, the
sun-god,
does not
prove that
Osiris was
originally
the sun.
Such
identifications
sprang
from
attempts to
unify and
amalgamate
the
many
local cults
of Egypt.</note>
Amongst modern scholars, Lepsius, in identifying Osiris
with the sun, appears to rely mainly on the passage of
Diodorus already quoted. But the monuments, he adds,
also show <q>that down to a late time Osiris was sometimes
conceived as <foreign rend='italic'>Ra</foreign>. In this quality he is named <foreign rend='italic'>Osiris-Ra</foreign>
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
even in the <q>Book of the Dead,</q> and Isis is often called <q>the
royal consort of Ra.</q></q><note place='foot'>Lepsius, <q>Über den ersten
ägyptischen Götterkreis und seine
geschichtlich-mythologische Entstehung,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königlichen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Berlin</hi>, 1851, pp. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> That Ra was both the physical sun
and the sun-god is undisputed; but with every deference
for the authority of so great a scholar as Lepsius, we may
doubt whether the identification of Osiris with Ra can
be accepted as proof that Osiris was originally the sun.
For the religion of ancient Egypt<note place='foot'>The view here taken of the history
of Egyptian religion is based on the
sketch in Ad. Erman's <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und
aegyptisches Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp.
351 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Compare C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
der Religion im Altertum</hi>
(Gotha, 1896-1903), i. 79 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> may be described as
a confederacy of local cults which, while maintaining against
each other a certain measure of jealous and even hostile
independence, were yet constantly subjected to the fusing
and amalgamating influence of political centralization and
philosophic thought. The history of the religion appears
to have largely consisted of a struggle between these
opposite forces or tendencies. On the one side there was
the conservative tendency to preserve the local cults with all
their distinctive features, fresh, sharp, and crisp as they had
been handed down from an immemorial past. On the other
side there was the progressive tendency, favoured by the
gradual fusion of the people under a powerful central
government, first to dull the edge of these provincial distinctions,
and finally to break them down completely and
merge them in a single national religion. The conservative
party probably mustered in its ranks the great bulk of the
people, their prejudices and affections being warmly enlisted
in favour of the local deity, with whose temple and rites
they had been familiar from childhood; and the popular
dislike of change, based on the endearing effect of old
association, must have been strongly reinforced by the less
disinterested opposition of the local clergy, whose material
interests would necessarily suffer with any decay of their
shrines. On the other hand the kings, whose power and
glory rose with the political and ecclesiastical consolidation
of the realm, were the natural champions of religious unity;
and their efforts would be seconded by the refined and
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
thoughtful minority, who could hardly fail to be shocked by
the many barbarous and revolting elements in the local
rites. As usually happens in such cases, the process of
religious unification appears to have been largely effected
by discovering points of similarity, real or imaginary, between
the provincial deities, which were thereupon declared to be
only different names or manifestations of the same god.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Most
Egyptian
gods were
at some
time
identified
with the
sun.
Attempt of
Amenophis
IV. to
abolish all
gods except
the sun-god. Failure
of the
attempt.</note>
Of the deities who thus acted as centres of attraction,
absorbing in themselves a multitude of minor divinities, by
far the most important was the sun-god Ra. There appear
to have been few gods in Egypt who were not at one time
or other identified with him. Ammon of Thebes, Horus of
the East, Horus of Edfu, Chnum of Elephantine, Tum of
Heliopolis, all were regarded as one god, the sun. Even
the water-god Sobk, in spite of his crocodile shape, did not
escape the same fate. Indeed one king, Amenophis IV.,
undertook to sweep away all the old gods at a stroke and
replace them by a single god, the <q>great living disc of the
sun.</q><note place='foot'>On this attempted revolution in
religion see Lepsius, in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der königl. Akad. der Wissenschaften
zu Berlin</hi>, 1851, pp. 196-201; A.
Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 355-357;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
pp. 76-84; H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Egypt</hi> (London, 1879), i. 441 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
A. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aegyptische Geschichte</hi>
(Gotha, 1884), pp. 396 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Religion der alten Agypter</hi>, pp. 20-22;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>,
pp. 35-43; C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der
Religion im Altertum</hi>, i. 84-92; G.
Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples
de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the
Egyptians</hi>, ii. 68-84; J. H. Breasted,
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London,
1908), pp. 264-279; A. Moret,
<hi rend='italic'>Kings and Gods of Egypt</hi> (New
York and London, 1912), pp. 41-68.
A very sympathetic account of this
remarkable religious reformer is given
by Professor J. H. Breasted (<hi rend='italic'>Development
of Religion and Thought
in Ancient Egypt</hi>, pp. 319-343).
Amenophis IV. reigned from about
1375 to 1358 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> His new capital,
Akhetaton, the modern Tell-el-Amarna,
was on the right bank of the Nile,
between Memphis and Thebes. The
king has been described as <q>of all the
Pharaohs the most curious and at the
same time the most enigmatic figure.</q>
To explain his bodily and mental
peculiarities some scholars conjectured
that through his mother, Queen Tii,
he might have had Semitic blood in his
veins. But this theory appears to have
been refuted by the discovery in 1905
of the tomb of Queen Tii's parents, the
contents of which are of pure Egyptian
style. See A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the hymns composed in his honour, this deity is
referred to as <q>the living disc of the sun, besides whom there
is none other.</q> He is said to have made <q>the far heaven</q>
and <q>men, beasts, and birds; he strengtheneth the eyes
with his beams, and when he showeth himself, all flowers
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
live and grow, the meadows flourish at his upgoing and
are drunken at his sight, all cattle skip on their feet,
and the birds that are in the marsh flutter for joy.</q> It is
he <q>who bringeth the years, createth the months, maketh
the days, calculateth the hours, the lord of time, by whom
men reckon.</q> In his zeal for the unity of god, the king
commanded to erase the names of all other gods from the
monuments, and to destroy their images. His rage was
particularly directed against the god Ammon, whose name
and likeness were effaced wherever they were found; even
the sanctity of the tomb was violated in order to destroy
the memorials of the hated deity. In some of the halls of
the great temples at Carnac, Luxor, and other places, all the
names of the gods, with a few chance exceptions, were
scratched out. The monarch even changed his own name,
Amenophis, because it was compounded of Ammon, and
took instead the name of Chu-en-aten, <q>gleam of the sun's
disc.</q> Thebes itself, the ancient capital of his glorious
ancestors, full of the monuments of their piety and idolatry,
was no longer a fit home for the puritan king. He deserted
it, and built for himself a new capital in Middle Egypt
at the place now known as Tell-el-Amarna. Here in a
few years a city of palaces and gardens rose like an
exhalation at his command, and here the king, his dearly
loved wife and children, and his complaisant courtiers
led a merry life. The grave and sombre ritual of Thebes
was discarded. The sun-god was worshipped with songs
and hymns, with the music of harps and flutes, with
offerings of cakes and fruits and flowers. Blood seldom
stained his kindly altars. The king himself celebrated the
offices of religion. He preached with unction, and we may
be sure that his courtiers listened with at least an outward
semblance of devotion. From the too-faithful portraits of
himself which he has bequeathed to us we can still picture
to ourselves the heretic king in the pulpit, with his tall,
lanky figure, his bandy legs, his pot-belly, his long, lean,
haggard face aglow with the fever of religious fanaticism.
Yet <q>the doctrine,</q> as he loved to call it, which he
proclaimed to his hearers was apparently no stern message
of renunciation in this world, of terrors in the world to
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
come. The thoughts of death, of judgment, and of a
life beyond the grave, which weighed like a nightmare
on the minds of the Egyptians, seem to have been
banished for a time. Even the name of Osiris, the
awful judge of the dead, is not once mentioned in the
graves at Tell-el-Amarna. All this lasted only during the
life of the reformer. His death was followed by a violent
reaction. The old gods were reinstated in their rank and
privileges: their names and images were restored, and new
temples were built. But all the shrines and palaces reared
by the late king were thrown down: even the sculptures
that referred to him and to his god in rock-tombs and on
the sides of hills were erased or filled up with stucco: his
name appears on no later monument, and was carefully
omitted from all official lists. The new capital was
abandoned, never to be inhabited again. Its plan can
still be traced in the sands of the desert.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Identification
with
the sun is
no evidence
of the
original
character
of an
Egyptian
god.</note>
This attempt of King Amenophis IV. is only an extreme
example of a tendency which appears to have
affected the religion of Egypt as far back as we can
trace it. Therefore, to come back to our point, in attempting
to discover the original character of any Egyptian god,
no weight can be given to the identification of him with
other gods, least of all with the sun-god Ra. Far from
helping to follow up the trail, these identifications only cross
and confuse it. The best evidence for the original character
of the Egyptian gods is to be found in their ritual and
myths, so far as these are known, and in the manner in
which they are portrayed on the monuments. It is mainly
on evidence drawn from these sources that I rest my
interpretation of Osiris.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The solar
theory of
Osiris does
not explain
his death
and resurrection.</note>
The ground upon which some modern writers seem chiefly
to rely for the identification of Osiris with the sun is that
the story of his death fits better with the solar phenomena
than with any other in nature. It may readily be admitted
that the daily appearance and disappearance of the sun
might very naturally be expressed by a myth of his death
and resurrection; and writers who regard Osiris as the sun
are careful to indicate that it is the diurnal, and not the
annual, course of the sun to which they understand the
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
myth to apply. Thus Renouf, who identified Osiris with
the sun, admitted that the Egyptian sun could not with any
show of reason be described as dead in winter.<note place='foot'>P. Le Page Renouf, <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on
the Origin and Growth of Religion</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1884), p. 113.</note> But if his
daily death was the theme of the legend, why was it celebrated
by an annual ceremony? This fact alone seems fatal to the
interpretation of the myth as descriptive of sunset and sunrise.
Again, though the sun may be said to die daily, in
what sense can he be said to be torn in pieces?<note place='foot'>The late eminent scholar C. P.
Tiele, who formerly interpreted Osiris
as a sun-god (<hi rend='italic'>History of Egyptian Religion</hi>,
pp. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), afterwards adopted
a view of his nature which approaches
more nearly to the one advocated in
this book. See his <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der Religion
im Altertum</hi>, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 123.
Professor Ed. Meyer also formerly
regarded Osiris as a sun-god; he now
interprets him as a great vegetation
god, dwelling in the depths of the
earth and causing the plants and
trees to spring from it. The god's
symbol, the <foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign> pillar (see above, pp.
<ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), he takes to be a tree-trunk
with cross-beams. See Ed. Meyer,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>, i. p. 67, § 57
(first edition, 1884); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, i.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 2. pp. 70,
84, 87 (second edition, 1909). Sir
Gaston Maspero has also abandoned the
theory that Osiris was the sun; he
now supposes that the deity originally
personified the Nile. See his <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
ancienne</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Paris, 1886), p. 35; and
his <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des Peuples de
l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. (Paris, 1895),
p. 130. Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge also
formerly interpreted Osiris as the Nile
(<hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>, i. 122,
123), and this view was held by some
ancient writers (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>,
32, 34, 36, 38, 39). Compare Miss
M. A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The Osireion at Abydos</hi>
(London, 1904), p. 29. Dr. Budge
now explains Osiris as a deified king.
See his <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>,
vol. i. pp. xviii, 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 37, 66
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 168, 254, 256, 290, 300, 312,
384. As to this view see below,
pp. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The death
and resurrection
of
Osiris
are more
naturally
explained
by the
annual
decay and
growth of
vegetation.</note>
In the course of our inquiry it has, I trust, been made
clear that there is another natural phenomenon to which the
conception of death and resurrection is as applicable as to
sunset and sunrise, and which, as a matter of fact, has been
so conceived and represented in folk-custom. That phenomenon
is the annual growth and decay of vegetation. A
strong reason for interpreting the death of Osiris as the
decay of vegetation rather than as the sunset is to be found
in the general, though not unanimous, voice of antiquity,
which classed together the worship and myths of Osiris,
Adonis, Attis, Dionysus, and Demeter, as religions of
essentially the same type.<note place='foot'>For the identification of Osiris
with Dionysus, and of Isis with
Demeter, see Herodotus, ii. 42, 49,
59, 144, 156; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>,
13, 35; Diodorus Siculus, i. 13, 25,
96, iv. 1; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, Hymn 42; Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>Praepar. Evang.</hi> iii. 11. 31; Servius on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> xi. 287; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, on Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 166; J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol. on
Lycophron</hi>, 212; Διηγήματα, xxii. 2,
in <hi rend='italic'>Mythographi Graeci</hi>, ed. A. Westermann
(Brunswick, 1843), p. 368;
Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> iv. 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Cornutus,
<hi rend='italic'>Theologiae Graecae Compendium</hi>, 28;
Ausonius, <hi rend='italic'>Epigrammata</hi>, 29 and 30.
For the identification of Osiris with
Adonis and Attis see Stephanus
Byzantius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἀμαθοῦς; Damascius,
<q>Vita Isodori,</q> in Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>,
ed. Im. Bekker (Berlin, 1824),
p. 343<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, lines 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Hippolytus,
<hi rend='italic'>Refutatio omnium haeresium</hi>, v. 9. p.
168 ed. Duncker and Schneidewin;
<hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, Hymn 42. For the identification
of Attis, Adonis, and Dionysus
see Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Ecclesiastica</hi>, iii.
23 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Graeca</hi>, lxvii.
448); Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Conviviales</hi>,
iv. 5. 3; Clement of Alexandria,
<hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 19, p. 16 ed.
Potter.</note> The consensus of ancient
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
opinion on this subject seems too great to be rejected as a
mere fancy. So closely did the rites of Osiris resemble
those of Adonis at Byblus that some of the people of
Byblus themselves maintained that it was Osiris and not
Adonis whose death was mourned by them.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 7. According
to Professor Ed. Meyer, the relations
of Egypt to Byblus were very
ancient and close; he even suggests
that there may have been from early
times an Egyptian colony, or at all
events an Egyptian military post, in
the city. The commercial importance
of Byblus arose from its possession
of the fine cedar forests on the Lebanon;
the timber was exported to Egypt,
where it was in great demand. See
Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2. pp. xix, 391 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Such a view
could certainly not have been held if the rituals of the two
gods had not been so alike as to be almost indistinguishable.
Herodotus found the similarity between the rites of Osiris
and Dionysus so great, that he thought it impossible the
latter could have arisen independently; they must, he
supposed, have been recently borrowed, with slight alterations,
by the Greeks from the Egyptians.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 49.</note> Again, Plutarch, a very
keen student of comparative religion, insists upon the detailed
resemblance of the rites of Osiris to those of Dionysus.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35.</note>
We cannot reject the evidence of such intelligent and trustworthy
witnesses on plain matters of fact which fell under
their own cognizance. Their explanations of the worships
it is indeed possible to reject, for the meaning of religious
cults is often open to question; but resemblances of ritual
are matters of observation. Therefore, those who explain
Osiris as the sun are driven to the alternative of either
dismissing as mistaken the testimony of antiquity to the
similarity of the rites of Osiris, Adonis, Attis, Dionysus,
and Demeter, or of interpreting all these rites as sun-worship.
No modern scholar has fairly faced and accepted either side
of this alternative. To accept the former would be to affirm
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
that we know the rites of these deities better than the men
who practised, or at least who witnessed them. To accept
the latter would involve a wrenching, clipping, mangling, and
distorting of myth and ritual from which even Macrobius
shrank.<note place='foot'>Osiris, Attis, Adonis, and Dionysus
were all resolved by him into the sun;
but he spared Demeter (Ceres), whom,
however, he interpreted as the moon.
See the <hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, bk. i.</note> On the other hand, the view that the essence of all
these rites was the mimic death and revival of vegetation,
explains them separately and collectively in an easy and
natural way, and harmonizes with the general testimony
borne by the ancients to their substantial similarity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. Osiris and the Moon.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris was
sometimes
interpreted
by the
ancients as
the moon.</note>
Before we conclude this study of Osiris it will be
worth while to consider an ancient view of his nature,
which deserves more attention than it has received in
modern times. We are told by Plutarch that among the
philosophers who saw in the gods of Egypt personifications
of natural objects and forces, there were some who interpreted
Osiris as the moon and his enemy Typhon as the
sun, <q>because the moon, with her humid and generative
light, is favourable to the propagation of animals and the
growth of plants; while the sun with his fierce fire scorches
and burns up all growing things, renders the greater part
of the earth uninhabitable by reason of his blaze, and often
overpowers the moon herself.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 41.</note> Whatever may be thought
of the physical qualities here attributed to the moon, the
arguments adduced by the ancients to prove the identity of
Osiris with that luminary carry with them a weight which
has at least not been lightened by the results of modern
research. An examination of them and of other evidence
pointing in the same direction will, perhaps, help to set the
original character of the Egyptian deity in a clearer light.<note place='foot'>On Osiris as a moon-god see E.
A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 19-22, 59,
384 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
1. Osiris was said to have lived or reigned twenty-eight
years. This might fairly be taken as a mythical expression
for a lunar month.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 13, 42.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. His body was reported to have been rent into fourteen
pieces.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> 18, 42. The hieroglyphic
texts sometimes speak of fourteen
pieces, and sometimes of sixteen, or
even eighteen. But fourteen seems to
have been the true number, because
the inscriptions of Denderah, which
refer to the rites of Osiris, describe the
mystic image of the god as composed
of fourteen pieces. See E. A. Wallis
Budge, <hi rend='italic'>The Gods of the Egyptians</hi>, ii.
126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, i. 386 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This might be interpreted of the waning moon,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
which appears to lose a portion of itself on each of the fourteen
days that make up the second half of a lunar month.
It is expressly said that his enemy Typhon found the body
of Osiris at the full moon;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 8.</note> thus the dismemberment of the
god would begin with the waning of the moon. To primitive
man it seems manifest that the waning moon is actually
dwindling, and he naturally enough explains its diminution
by supposing that the planet is being rent or broken in
pieces or eaten away. The Klamath Indians of Oregon
speak of the moon as <q>the one broken to pieces</q> with
reference to its changing aspect; they never apply such a
term to the sun,<note place='foot'>A. S. Gatschet, <hi rend='italic'>The Klamath
Indians of South-Western Oregon</hi>
(Washington, 1890), p. lxxxix.</note> whose apparent change of bulk at different
seasons of the year is far too insignificant to attract the
attention of the savage, or at least to be described by him in
such forcible language. The Dacotas believe that when the
moon is full, a great many little mice begin to nibble at one
side of it and do not cease till they have eaten it all up,
after which a new moon is born and grows to maturity, only
to share the fate of its countless predecessors.<note place='foot'>S. R. Riggs, <hi rend='italic'>Dakota Grammar,
Texts, and Ethnography</hi> (Washington,
1893), p. 16.</note> A similar
belief is held by the Huzuls of the Carpathians, except that
they ascribe the destruction of the old moon to wolves
instead of to mice.<note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <hi rend='italic'>Die Huzulen</hi>
(Vienna, 1894), p. 97.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. At the new moon of the month Phamenoth, which
was the beginning of spring, the Egyptians celebrated what
they called <q>the entry of Osiris into the moon.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 43.</note>
</p>

<p>
4. At the ceremony called <q>the burial of Osiris</q> the
Egyptians made a crescent-shaped chest <q>because the
moon, when it approaches the sun, assumes the form of a
crescent and vanishes.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> 43.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. The bull Apis, held to be an image of the soul of
Osiris,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> 20, 29.</note> was born of a cow which was believed to have been
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
impregnated, not in the vulgar way by a bull, but by a divine
influence emanating from the moon.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 43; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> viii. 1. 3. Compare
Herodotus, iii. 28; Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Anim.</hi>
xi. 10; Mela, i. 9. 58.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. Once a year, at the full moon, pigs were sacrificed
simultaneously to the moon and Osiris.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 47; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 8. As to pigs in relation to
Osiris, see <hi rend='italic'>Spirits of the Corn and of
the Wild</hi>, ii. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
7. In a hymn supposed to be addressed by Isis to Osiris,
it is said that Thoth&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Placeth thy soul in the bark Ma-at,</hi></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>In that name which is thine, of <hi rend='smallcaps'>God Moon</hi>.</hi></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And again:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Thou who comest to us as a child each month,</hi></q></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>We do not cease to contemplate thee.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thine emanation heightens the brilliancy</hi></l>
<l><q rend='post'><hi rend='italic'>Of the stars of Orion in the firmament.</hi></q><note place='foot'>P. J. de Horrack, <q>Lamentations
of Isis and Nephthys,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Records of the
Past</hi>, ii. (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>) pp. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
H. Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie
der alten Aegypter</hi>, pp. 629 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; E. A.
Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, i. 389. <q>Apart from
the fact that Osiris is actually called
<foreign rend='italic'>Āsār Aāḥ</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> <q>Osiris the Moon,</q> there
are so many passages which prove
beyond all doubt that at one period at
least Osiris was the Moon-god, that it
is difficult to understand why Diodorus
stated that Osiris was the sun and Isis
the moon</q> (E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> i. 21).</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here then Osiris is identified with the moon in set terms.
If in the same hymn he is said to <q>illuminate us like Ra</q>
(the sun), that is obviously no reason for identifying him with
the sun, but quite the contrary. For though the moon may
reasonably be compared to the sun, neither the sun nor
anything else can reasonably be compared to itself.
</p>

<p>
8. In art Osiris is sometimes represented as a human-headed
mummy grasping in his hands his characteristic
emblems and wearing on his head, instead of the usual
crown, a full moon within a crescent.<note place='foot'>E. A. Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the
Egyptian Resurrection</hi>, i. 59.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The identification
of
Osiris
with the
moon
appears to
be based
on a comparatively
late theory
that all
things
grow and
decay with
the waxing
and waning
of the
moon.</note>
Now if in one of his aspects Osiris was originally a
deity of vegetation, we can easily enough understand
why in a later and more philosophic age he should
come to be thus identified or confounded with the moon.<note place='foot'>According to C. P. Tiele (<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
der Religion im Altertum</hi>, i. 79) the
conception of Osiris as the moon was
late and never became popular. This
entirely accords with the view adopted
in the text.</note>
For as soon as he begins to meditate upon the causes of
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
things, the early philosopher is led by certain obvious,
though fallacious, appearances to regard the moon as the
ultimate cause of the growth of plants. In the first place
he associates its apparent growth and decay with the
growth and decay of sublunary things, and imagines that in
virtue of a secret sympathy the celestial phenomena really
produce those terrestrial changes which in point of fact they
merely resemble. Thus Pliny says that the moon may fairly
be considered the planet of breath, <q>because it saturates the
earth and by its approach fills bodies, while by its departure
it empties them. Hence it is,</q> he goes on, <q>that shell-fish
increase with the increase of the moon and that bloodless
creatures especially feel breath at that time; even the blood
of men grows and diminishes with the light of the moon, and
leaves and herbage also feel the same influence, since the
lunar energy penetrates all things.</q><note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> ii. 221.</note> <q>There is no doubt,</q>
writes Macrobius, <q>that the moon is the author and framer
of mortal bodies, so much so that some things expand or
shrink as it waxes or wanes.</q><note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in somnium
Scipionis</hi>, i. 11. 7.</note> Again, Aulus Gellius puts
in the mouth of a friend the remark that <q>the same things
which grow with the waxing, do dwindle with the waning
moon,</q> and he quotes from a commentary of Plutarch's on
Hesiod a statement that the onion is the only vegetable
which violates this great law of nature by sprouting in the
wane and withering in the increase of the moon.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, xx. 8. For the
opinions of the ancients on this subject
see further W. H. Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>Über Selene
und Verwandtes</hi> (Leipsic, 1890), pp. 61
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Scottish
Highlanders allege that in the increase of the moon everything
has a tendency to grow or stick together;<note place='foot'>John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, <hi rend='italic'>Scotland
and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth
Century</hi>, edited by A. Allardyce (Edinburgh
and London, 1888), ii. 449.</note> and they
call the second moon of autumn <q>the ripening moon</q>
(<foreign rend='italic'>Gealach an abachaidh</foreign>), because they imagine that crops
ripen as much by its light as by day.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Glasgow, 1902),
pp. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Practical
rules
founded on
this lunar
theory. Supposed
influence
of the
phases of
the moon
on the
operations
of
husbandry.</note>
From this supposed influence of the moon on the life of
plants and animals, men in ancient and modern times have
deduced a whole code of rules for the guidance of the
husbandman, the shepherd, and others in the conduct of
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
their affairs. Thus an ancient writer on agriculture lays it
down as a maxim, that whatever is to be sown should be
sown while the moon is waxing, and that whatever is to be
cut or gathered should be cut or gathered while it is waning.<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, i. 34. 8.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> i. 6. 12; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi>
xviii. 321, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>omnia quae caeduntur,
carpuntur, tondentur innocentius decrescente
luna quam crescente fiunt</foreign></q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, i. 6. 8, τινὲς δοκιμάζουσι
μηδὲν φθινούσης τῆς σελήνης ἀλλὰ αὐξανομένης
φυτεύειν.</note>
A modern treatise on superstition describes how the superstitious
man regulates all his conduct by the moon: <q>Whatever
he would have to grow, he sets about it when she is in
her increase; but for what he would have made less he
chooses her wane.</q><note place='foot'>J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi> (London, 1882-1883),
iii. 144, quoting Werenfels, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertation
upon Superstition</hi> (London, 1748),
p. 6.</note> In Germany the phases of the moon
are observed by superstitious people at all the more or even
less important actions of life, such as tilling the fields,
building or changing houses, marriages, hair-cutting, bleeding,
cupping, and so forth. The particular rules vary in different
places, but the principle generally followed is that whatever is
done to increase anything should be done while the moon
is waxing; whatever is done to diminish anything should
be done while the moon is waning. For example, sowing,
planting, and grafting should be done in the first half of
the moon, but the felling of timber and mowing should be
done in the second half.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1869), § 65, pp. 57
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Berlin, 1875-1878), ii.
595; Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>
(Iserlohn, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), p. 128; M.
Prätorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi> (Berlin,
1871), p. 18; O. Schell, <q>Einige
Bemerkungen über den Mond im heutigen
Glauben des bergischen Volkes,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Am Ur-quell</hi>, v. (1894) p. 173. The
rule that the grafting of trees should be
done at the waxing of the moon is laid
down by Pliny (<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvii. 108).
At Deutsch-Zepling in Transylvania,
by an inversion of the usual custom,
seed is generally sown at the waning
of the moon (A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische
Sitten und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi>, Hermannstadt, 1880, p.
7). Some French peasants also prefer
to sow in the wane (F. Chapiseau,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</hi>,
Paris, 1902, i. 291). In the Abruzzi
also sowing and grafting are commonly
done when the moon is on the wane;
timber that is to be durable must be
cut in January during the moon's decrease
(G. Finamore, <hi rend='italic'>Credenze, Usi e
Costumi Abruzzesi</hi>, Palermo, 1890, p.
43).</note> In various parts of Europe it
is believed that plants, nails, hair, and corns, cut while the
moon is on the increase, will grow again fast, but that if cut
while it is on the decrease they will grow slowly or waste
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
away.<note place='foot'>P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions et Superstitions
de la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris,
1882), ii. 355; L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
des Hautes-Vosges</hi> (Paris, 1889), p. 5;
J. Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities of
Great Britain</hi>, iii. 150; Holzmayer,
<q>Osiliana,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen der
gelehrten Estnichen Gesellschaft zu
Dorpat</hi>, vii. (1872) p. 47.</note> Hence persons who wish their hair to grow thick
and long should cut it in the first half of the moon.<note place='foot'>The rule is mentioned by Varro,
<hi rend='italic'>Rerum Rusticarum</hi>, i. 37 (where we
should probably read <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ne decrescente
tendens calvos fiam</foreign>,</q> and refer <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>istaec</foreign> to
the former member of the preceding
sentence); A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Montanus,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 128; P. Sébillot,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> (Stuttgart,
1852), p. 511, § 421; W. J. A. von
Tettau und J. D. H. Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens
und Westpreussens</hi> (Berlin, 1837), p.
283; A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 386, § 92;
L. Schandein, in <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und
Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</hi>
(Munich, 1860-1867), iv. 2, p. 402;
F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Volksglaube und religiöser
Brauch der Südslaven</hi> (Münster, i. W.
1890), p. 15; E. Krause, <q>Abergläubische
Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube
in Berlin,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für
Ethnologie</hi>, xv. (1883) p. 91; R.
Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Sächsische Volkskunde</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Dresden,
1901), p. 369; C. S. Burne and
G. F. Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi>
(London, 1883), p. 259. The reason
assigned in the text was probably the
original one in all cases, though it is
not always the one alleged now.</note> On
the same principle sheep are shorn when the moon is
waxing, because it is supposed that the wool will then
be longest and most enduring.<note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 16;
Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Varro, <hi rend='italic'>Rerum Rusticarum</hi>,
i. 37 (see above, note 2). However,
the opposite rule is observed in
the Upper Vosges, where it is thought
that if the sheep are shorn at the new
moon the quantity of wool will be much
less than if they were shorn in the
waning of the moon (L. F. Sauvé,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</hi>, p. 5). In
the Bocage of Normandy, also, wool is
clipped during the waning of the moon;
otherwise moths would get into it (J.
Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage Normand</hi>,
Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887, ii. 12).</note> Some negroes of the
Gaboon think that taro and other vegetables never thrive
if they are planted after full moon, but that they grow fast
and strong if they are planted in the first quarter.<note place='foot'>Father Lejeune, <q>Dans la forêt,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Missions Catholiques</hi>, xxvii. (1895) p.
272.</note> The
Highlanders of Scotland used to expect better crops of
grain by sowing their seed in the moon's increase.<note place='foot'>S. Johnson, <hi rend='italic'>Journey to the Western
Islands of Scotland</hi> (Baltimore, 1810),
p. 183.</note> On the
other hand they thought that garden vegetables, such as
onions and kail, run to seed if they are sown in the increase,
but that they grow to pot-herbs if they are sown in
the wane.<note place='foot'>J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi>, p. 306.</note> So Thomas Tusser advised the peasant to
sow peas and beans in the wane of the moon <q>that they
with the planet may rest and arise.</q><note place='foot'>Thomas Tusser, <hi rend='italic'>Five Hundred
Points of Good Husbandry</hi>, New
Edition (London, 1812), p. 107 (under
February).</note> The Zulus welcome
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
the first appearance of the new moon with beating of drums
and other demonstrations of joy; but next day they abstain
from all labour, <q>thinking that if anything is sown on those
days they can never reap the benefit thereof.</q><note place='foot'>Fairweather, in W. F. Owen's
<hi rend='italic'>Narrative of Voyages to explore the
Shores of Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar</hi>
(London, 1833), ii. 396 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But in this
matter of sowing and planting a refined distinction is sometimes
drawn by French, German, and Esthonian peasants;
plants which bear fruit above ground are sown by them
when the moon is waxing, but plants which are cultivated
for the sake of their roots, such as potatoes and turnips, are
sown when the moon is waning.<note place='foot'>A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
§ 65, p. 58; J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>loc. cit.</hi>;
E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 511, §
422; Th. Siebs, <q>Das Saterland,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Volkskunde</hi>, iii. (1893)
p. 278; Holzmayer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 47.</note> The reason for this distinction
seems to be a vague idea that the waxing moon
is coming up and the waning moon going down, and that
accordingly fruits which grow upwards should be sown in
the former period, and fruits which grow downwards in the
latter. Before beginning to plant their cacao the Pipiles of
Central America exposed the finest seeds for four nights to
the moonlight,<note place='foot'>H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of
the Pacific States</hi> (London, 1875-1876),
ii. 719 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> but whether they did so at the waxing or
waning of the moon is not said. Even pots, it would seem,
are not exempt from this great law of nature. In Uganda
<q>potters waited for the new moon to appear before baking
their pots; when it was some days old, they prepared their
fires and baked the vessels. No potter would bake pots
when the moon was past the full, for he believed that they
would be a failure, and would be sure to crack or break in
the burning, if he did so, and that his labour accordingly
would go for nothing.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 402.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
phases of
the moon
in relation
to the
felling of
timber.</note>
Again, the waning of the moon has been commonly
recommended both in ancient and modern times as the
proper time for felling trees,<note place='foot'>Cato, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cultura</hi>, 37. 4;
Varro, <hi rend='italic'>Rerum Rusticarum</hi>, i. 37;
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 190; Palladius,
<hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi>, ii. 22, xii. 15; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> iii. 10. 3; Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> vii. 16; A. Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des
Königreichs Bayern</hi>, iv. 2, p. 402;
W. Kolbe, <hi rend='italic'>Hessische Volks-Sitten und
Gebräuche</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Marburg, 1888), p. 58;
L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</hi>,
p. 5; F. Chapiseau, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
de la Beauce et du Perche</hi>, i. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
M. Martin, <q>Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in J.
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii.
630; J. G. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Witchcraft and
Second Sight in the Highlands and
Islands of Scotland</hi>, p. 306; G.
Amalfi, <hi rend='italic'>Tradizioni ed Usi nella peninsola
Sorrentina</hi> (Palermo, 1890), p.
87; K. von den Steinen, <hi rend='italic'>Unter den
Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</hi> (Berlin,
1894), p. 559. Compare F. de
Castelnau, <hi rend='italic'>Expédition dans les parties
centrales de l'Amérique du Sud</hi> (Paris,
1851-1852), iii. 438. Pliny, while
he says that the period from the
twentieth to the thirtieth day of the
lunar month was the season generally
recommended, adds that the best time
of all, according to universal opinion,
was the interlunar day, between the
old and the new moon, when the
planet is invisible through being in
conjunction with the sun.</note> apparently because it was
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
thought fit and natural that the operation of cutting down
should be performed on earth at the time when the lunar
orb was, so to say, being cut down in the sky. In France
before the Revolution the forestry laws enjoined that trees
should only be felled after the moon had passed the full;
and in French bills announcing the sale of timber you may
still read a notice that the wood was cut in the waning of
the moon.<note place='foot'>J. Lecœur, <hi rend='italic'>Esquisses du Bocage
Normand</hi>, ii. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So among the Shans of Burma, when a house
is to be built, it is a rule that <q>a lucky day should be chosen
to commence the cutting of the bamboos. The day must
not only be a fortunate one for the builder, but it must also
be in the second half of the month, when the moon is
waning. Shans believe that if bamboos are cut during the
first half of the month, when the moon is waxing, they do
not last well, as boring insects attack them and they will
soon become rotten. This belief is prevalent all over the
East.</q><note place='foot'>Mrs. Leslie Milne, <hi rend='italic'>Shans at Home</hi>
(London, 1910), p. 100.</note> A like belief obtains in various parts of Mexico.
No Mexican will cut timber while the moon is increasing;
they say it must be cut while the moon is waning or the wood
will certainly rot.<note place='foot'>Letter of Mr. A. S. F. Marshall,
dated Hacienda <q>La Maronna,</q> Cd.
Porfirio Diaz, Coah., Mexico, 2nd
October 1908. The writer gives instances
confirmatory of this belief. I
have to thank Professor A. C. Seward
of Cambridge for kindly showing me
this letter.</note> In Colombia, South America, people think
that corn should only be sown and timber felled when the
moon is on the wane. They say that the waxing moon
draws the sap up through the trunk and branches, whereas
the sap flows down and leaves the wood dry during the
wane of the moon.<note place='foot'>Letter of Mr. Francis S. Schloss
to me, dated 58 New Cavendish
Street, W., 12th May 1912. Mr.
Schloss adds that <q>as a matter of
practical observation, timber, etc.,
should only be felled when the moon
is waning. This has been stated to me
not only by natives, but also by English
mining engineers of high repute, who
have done work in Colombia.</q></note> But sometimes the opposite rule is
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
adopted, and equally forcible arguments are urged in its
defence. Thus, when the Wabondei of Eastern Africa are
about to build a house, they take care to cut the posts for
it when the moon is on the increase; for they say that
posts cut when the moon is wasting away would soon rot,
whereas posts cut while the moon is waxing are very
durable.<note place='foot'>O. Baumann, <hi rend='italic'>Usambara und seine
Nachbargebiete</hi> (Berlin, 1891), p. 125.</note> The same rule is observed for the same reason in
some parts of Germany.<note place='foot'>Montanus, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Volksfeste,
Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</hi>,
p. 128.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The moon
regarded
as the
source of
moisture.</note>
But the partisans of the ordinarily received opinion have
sometimes supported it by another reason, which introduces
us to the second of those fallacious appearances by which
men have been led to regard the moon as the cause of growth
in plants. From observing rightly that dew falls most
thickly on cloudless nights, they inferred wrongly that it
was caused by the moon, a theory which the poet Alcman
expressed in mythical form by saying that dew was a
daughter of Zeus and the moon.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> iii. 10.
3; Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> vii. 16. See
further, W. H. Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>Über Selene
und Verwandtes</hi> (Leipsic, 1890), pp.
49 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Hence the ancients concluded
that the moon is the great source of moisture, as the
sun is the great source of heat.<note place='foot'>Plutarch and Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi>;
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> ii. 223, xx. 1;
Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Problemata</hi>, xxiv. 14, p.
937 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. I. Bekker (Berlin).</note> And as the humid power
of the moon was assumed to be greater when the planet
was waxing than when it was waning, they thought that
timber cut during the increase of the luminary would be
saturated with moisture, whereas timber cut in the wane
would be comparatively dry. Hence we are told that in
antiquity carpenters would reject timber felled when the
moon was growing or full, because they believed that such
timber teemed with sap;<note place='foot'>Macrobius and Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>ll.cc.</hi></note> and in the Vosges at the present
day people allege that wood cut at the new moon does not
dry.<note place='foot'>L. F. Sauvé, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</hi>,
p. 5.</note> We have seen that the same reason is assigned for
the same practice in Colombia.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>.</note> In the Hebrides peasants
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
give the same reason for cutting their peats when the moon
is on the wane; <q>for they observe that if they are cut in
the increase, they continue still moist and never burn clear,
nor are they without smoke, but the contrary is daily
observed of peats cut in the decrease.</q><note place='foot'>M. Martin, <q>Description of the
Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in
J. Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
iii. 630.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The moon,
being
viewed as
the cause
of vegetable
growth, is
naturally
worshipped
by agricultural
peoples.</note>
Thus misled by a double fallacy primitive philosophy
comes to view the moon as the great cause of vegetable
growth, first, because the planet seems itself to grow, and
second, because it is supposed to be the source of dew
and moisture. It is no wonder, therefore, that agricultural
peoples should adore the planet which they believe to
influence so profoundly the crops on which they depend
for subsistence. Accordingly we find that in the hotter
regions of America, where maize is cultivated and manioc is
the staple food, the moon was recognized as the principal
object of worship, and plantations of manioc were assigned
to it as a return for the service it rendered in the production
of the crops. The worship of the moon in preference to the
sun was general among the Caribs, and, perhaps, also among
most of the other Indian tribes who cultivated maize in the
tropical forests to the east of the Andes; and the same
thing has been observed, under the same physical conditions,
among the aborigines of the hottest region of Peru, the
northern valleys of Yuncapata. Here the Indians of Pacasmayu
and the neighbouring valleys revered the moon as
their principal divinity. The <q>house of the moon</q> at Pacasmayu
was the chief temple of the district; and the same
sacrifices of maize-flour, of wine, and of children which were
offered by the mountaineers of the Andes to the Sun-god,
were offered by the lowlanders to the Moon-god in order
that he might cause their crops to thrive.<note place='foot'><p>E. J. Payne, <hi rend='italic'>History of the New
World called America</hi>, i. (Oxford,
1892) p. 495. In his remarks on
the origin of moon-worship this learned
and philosophical historian has indicated
(<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 493 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) the true causes
which lead primitive man to trace the
growth of plants to the influence of
the moon. Compare Sir E. B. Tylor,
<hi rend='italic'>Primitive Culture</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London, 1873),
i. 130. Payne suggests that the custom
of naming the months after the principal
natural products that ripen in them may
have contributed to the same result.
The custom is certainly very common
among savages, as I hope to show
elsewhere, but whether it has contributed
to foster the fallacy in question
seems doubtful.
</p>
<p>
The Indians of Brazil are said to
pay more attention to the moon than
to the sun, regarding it as a source
both of good and ill. See J. B. von
Spix und C. F. von Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Reise in
Brasilien</hi> (Munich, 1823-1831), i. 379.
The natives of Mori, a district of Central
Celebes, believe that the rice-spirit
Omonga lives in the moon and eats up
the rice in the granary if he is not
treated with due respect. See A. C.
Kruijt, <q>Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen
omtrent de Toboengkoe en de
Tomori,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen van wege het
Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xliv. (1900) p. 231.</p></note> In ancient
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
Babylonia, where the population was essentially agricultural,
the moon-god took precedence of the sun-god and was
indeed reckoned his father.<note place='foot'>E. A. Budge, <hi rend='italic'>Nebuchadnezzar,
King of Babylon, on recently-discovered
inscriptions of this King</hi>, pp. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
A. H. Sayce, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Ancient
Babylonians</hi>, p. 155; M. Jastrow,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</hi>, pp.
68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. W. King, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonian
Religion and Mythology</hi> (London,
1899), pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The Ahts of Vancouver
Island, a tribe of fishers and
hunters, view the moon as the husband
of the sun and as a more powerful
deity than her (G. M. Sproat, <hi rend='italic'>Scenes
and Studies of Savage Life</hi>, London,
1868, p. 206).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus
Osiris, the
old corn-god,
was
afterwards
identified
with the
moon.</note>
Hence it would be no matter for surprise if, after
worshipping the crops which furnished them with the means
of subsistence, the ancient Egyptians should in later times
have identified the spirit of the corn with the moon, which
a false philosophy had taught them to regard as the
ultimate cause of the growth of vegetation. In this way
we can understand why in their most recent forms the myth
and ritual of Osiris, the old god of trees and corn, should
bear many traces of efforts made to bring them into a
superficial conformity with the new doctrine of his lunar
affinity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. The Doctrine of Lunar Sympathy.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
doctrine
of lunar
sympathy.</note>
In the preceding chapter some evidence was adduced of the
sympathetic influence which the waxing or waning moon is
popularly supposed to exert on growth, especially on the
growth of vegetation. But the doctrine of lunar sympathy
does not stop there; it is applied also to the affairs of man,
and various customs and rules have been deduced from it
which aim at the amelioration and even the indefinite
extension of human life. To illustrate this application of
the popular theory at length would be out of place here, but
a few cases may be mentioned by way of specimen.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theory
that all
things wax
or wane
with the
moon. The
ceremonies
observed at
new moon
are often
magical
rather than
religious,
being
intended
to renew
sympathetically
the
life of man.</note>
The natural fact on which all the customs in question
seem to rest is the apparent monthly increase and decrease
of the moon. From this observation men have inferred that
all things simultaneously wax or wane in sympathy with it.<note place='foot'>This principle is clearly recognized
and well illustrated by J. Grimm
(<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 594-596).</note>
Thus the Mentras or Mantras of the Malay Peninsula have a
tradition that in the beginning men did not die but grew
thin with the waning of the moon, and waxed fat as she
neared the full.<note place='foot'>D. F. A. Hervey, <q>The Mentra
Traditions,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Straits
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>,
No. 10 (Singapore, 1883), p. 190;
W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden,
<hi rend='italic'>Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</hi>
(London, 1906), ii. 337.</note> Of the Scottish Highlanders we are told
that <q>the moon in her increase, full growth, and in her
wane are with them the emblems of a rising, flourishing,
and declining fortune. At the last period of her revolution
they carefully avoid to engage in any business of importance;
but the first and middle they seize with avidity, presaging
the most auspicious issue to their undertakings.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Grant (parish minister of
Kirkmichael), in Sir John Sinclair's
<hi rend='italic'>Statistical Account of Scotland</hi> (Edinburgh,
1791-1799), xii. 457.</note> Similarly
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
in some parts of Germany it is commonly believed that
whatever is undertaken when the moon is on the increase
succeeds well, and that the full moon brings everything to
perfection; whereas business undertaken in the wane of the
moon is doomed to failure.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Nord-deutsche
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>
(Leipsic, 1848), p. 457, § 419.</note> This German belief has come
down, as we might have anticipated, from barbaric times;
for Tacitus tells us that the Germans considered the new or
the full moon the most auspicious time for business;<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, 11.</note> and
Caesar informs us that the Germans despaired of victory if
they joined battle before the new moon.<note place='foot'>Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>De bello Gallico</hi>, i. 50.</note> The Spartans
seem to have been of the same opinion, for it was a rule
with them never to march out to war except when the moon
was full. The rule prevented them from sending troops in
time to fight the Persians at Marathon,<note place='foot'>Herodotus, vi. 106; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De
astrologia</hi>, 25; Pausanias, i. 28. 4.</note> and but for
Athenian valour this paltry superstition might have turned
the scale of battle and decided the destiny of Greece, if not
of Europe, for centuries. The Athenians themselves paid
dear for a similar scruple: an eclipse of the moon cost them
the loss of a gallant fleet and army before Syracuse, and
practically sealed the fate of Athens, for she never recovered
from the blow.<note place='foot'>Thucydides, vii. 50.</note> So heavy is the sacrifice which superstition
demands of its votaries. In this respect the Greeks were
on a level with the negroes of the Sudan, among whom, if a
march has been decided upon during the last quarter of the
moon, the departure is always deferred until the first day
of the new moon. No chief would dare to undertake an
expedition and lead out his warriors before the appearance
of the crescent. Merchants and private persons observe the
same rule on their journeys.<note place='foot'>Le capitaine Binger, <hi rend='italic'>Du Niger
au Golfe de Guinée</hi> (Paris, 1892), ii.
116.</note> In like manner the Mandingoes
of Senegambia pay great attention to the changes of the
moon, and think it very unlucky to begin a journey or any
other work of consequence in the last quarter.<note place='foot'>Mungo Park, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in the
Interior Districts of Africa</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi> (London,
1807), pp. 406 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
It is especially the appearance of the new moon, with
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
its promise of growth and increase, which is greeted with
ceremonies intended to renew and invigorate, by means of
sympathetic magic, the life of man. Observers, ignorant of
savage superstition, have commonly misinterpreted such
customs as worship or adoration paid to the moon. In
point of fact the ceremonies of new moon are probably in
many cases rather magical than religious. The Indians of
the Ucayali River in Peru hail the appearance of the new
moon with great joy. They make long speeches to her,
accompanied with vehement gesticulations, imploring her
protection and begging that she will be so good as to
invigorate their bodies.<note place='foot'>W. Smythe and F. Lowe, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative
of a Journey from Lima to Para</hi>
(London, 1836), p. 230.</note> On the day when the new moon
first appeared, it was a custom with the Indians of San Juan
Capistrano, in California, to call together all the young men
for the purpose of its celebration. <q><foreign rend='italic'>Correr la luna!</foreign></q> shouted
one of the old men, <q>Come, my boys, the moon! the moon!</q>
Immediately the young men began to run about in a
disorderly fashion as if they were distracted, while the old
men danced in a circle, saying, <q>As the moon dieth, and
cometh to life again, so we also having to die will again
live.</q><note place='foot'>Father G. Boscana, <q>Chinig-chinich,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Life in California, by an
American</hi> [A. Robinson] (New York,
1846), pp. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> An old traveller tells us that at the appearance of
every new moon the negroes of the Congo clapped their
hands and cried out, sometimes falling on their knees, <q>So
may I renew my life as thou art renewed.</q> But if the sky
happened to be clouded, they did nothing, alleging that the
planet had lost its virtue.<note place='foot'>Merolla, <q>Voyage to Congo,</q> in
J. Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
xvi. 273.</note> A somewhat similar custom
prevails among the Ovambo of South-Western Africa. On
the first moonlight night of the new moon, young and old,
their bodies smeared with white earth, perhaps in imitation
of the planet's silvery light, dance to the moon and address
to it wishes which they feel sure will be granted.<note place='foot'>H. Schinz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</hi>
(Oldenburg and Leipsic, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>),
p. 319.</note> We may
conjecture that among these wishes is a prayer for a renewal
of life. When a Masai sees the new moon he throws a
twig or stone at it with his left hand, and says, <q>Give me
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
long life,</q> or <q>Give me strength</q>; and when a pregnant
woman sees the new moon she milks some milk into a
small gourd, which she covers with green grass. Then she
pours the milk away in the direction of the moon and says,
<q>Moon, give me my child safely.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi> (Oxford,
1905), p. 274.</note> Among the Wagogo
of German East Africa, at sight of the new moon some
people break a stick in pieces, spit on the pieces, and throw
them towards the moon, saying, <q>Let all illness go to the
west, where the sun sets.</q><note place='foot'>H. Cole, <q>Notes on the Wagogo
of German East Africa,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxii. (1902)
p. 330.</note> Among the Boloki of the
Upper Congo there is much shouting and gesticulation on
the appearance of a new moon. Those who have enjoyed
good health pray that it may be continued, and those who
have been sick ascribe their illness to the coming of the
luminary and beg her to take away bad health and give
them good health instead.<note place='foot'>John H. Weeks, <hi rend='italic'>Among Congo
Cannibals</hi> (London, 1913), p. 142.</note> The Esthonians think that all
the misfortunes which might befall a man in the course of a
month may be forestalled and shifted to the moon, if a man
will only say to the new moon, <q>Good morrow, new moon.
I must grow young, you must grow old. My eyes must
grow bright, yours must grow dark. I must grow light as
a bird, you must grow heavy as iron.</q><note place='foot'>J. G. Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsch-russischen
Ostseeprovinzen</hi> (Dresden and Leipsic,
1841), ii. 279. Compare Boecler-Kreutzwald,
<hi rend='italic'>Der Ehsten abergläubische
Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</hi>
(St. Petersburg, 1854), pp. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
595, note 1. The power of regeneration
ascribed to the moon in these
customs is sometimes attributed to the
sun. Thus it is said that the Chiriguanos
Indians of South-Eastern
Bolivia often address the sun as follows:
<q>Thou art born and disappearest
every day, only to revive always young.
Cause that it may be so with me.</q>
See A. Thouar, <hi rend='italic'>Explorations dans
l'Amérique du Sud</hi> (Paris, 1891),
p. 50.</note> On the fifteenth
day of the moon, that is, at the time when the luminary has
begun to wane, the Coreans take round pieces of paper, either
red or white, which represent the moon, and having fixed
them perpendicularly on split sticks they place them on the
tops of the houses. Then persons who have been forewarned
by fortune-tellers of impending evil pray to the moon to
remove it from them.<note place='foot'>W. Woodville Rockhill, <q>Notes
on some of the Laws, Customs, and
Superstitions of Korea,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The American
Anthropologist</hi>, iv. (Washington, 1891),
p. 185.</note>
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Attempts
to eat or
drink the
moonlight.</note>
In India people attempt to absorb the vital influence
of the moon by drinking water in which the luminary is
reflected. Thus the Mohammedans of Oude fill a silver
basin with water and hold it so that the orb of the full moon
is mirrored in it. The person to be benefited must look
steadfastly at the moon in the basin, then shut his eyes
and drink the water at one gulp. Doctors recommend the
draught as a remedy for nervous disorders and palpitation
of the heart. Somewhat similar customs prevail among the
Hindoos of Northern India. At the full moon of the month
of Kuar (September-October) people lay out food on the
house-tops, and when it has absorbed the rays of the moon
they distribute it among their relations, who are supposed to
lengthen their life by eating of the food which has thus been
saturated with moonshine. Patients are often made to look
at the moon reflected in melted butter, oil, or milk as a cure
for leprosy and the like diseases.<note place='foot'>W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion and
Folk-lore of Northern India</hi> (Westminster,
1896), i. 14 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
supposed
influence of
moonlight
on children:
presentation
of
infants to
the new
moon.</note>
Naturally enough the genial influence of moonshine is
often supposed to be particularly beneficial to children; for
will not the waxing moon help them to wax in strength and
stature? Hence in the island of Kiriwina, one of the
Trobriands Group to the east of New Guinea, a mother
always lifts up or presents her child to the first full moon
after its birth in order that it may grow fast and talk soon.<note place='foot'>George Brown, D.D., <hi rend='italic'>Melanesians
and Polynesians</hi> (London, 1910), p.
37.</note>
So among the Baganda of Central Africa it was customary
for each mother to take her child out at the first new
moon after its birth, and to point out the moon to the
infant; this was thought to make the child grow healthy
and strong.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 58.</note> Among the Thonga of South Africa the
presentation of the baby to the moon does not take place
until the mother has resumed her monthly periods, which
usually happens in the third month after the birth. When
the new moon appears, the mother takes a torch or a
burning brand from the fire and goes to the ash-heap behind
the hut. She is followed by the grandmother carrying the
child. At the ash-heap the mother throws the burning
stick towards the moon, while the grandmother tosses the
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
baby into the air, saying, <q>This is your moon!</q> The
child squalls and rolls over on the ash-heap. Then the
mother snatches up the infant and nurses it; so they go
home.<note place='foot'>Henri A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>The Life of a
South African Tribe</hi> (Neuchatel, 1912-1913),
i. 51.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Infants
presented
to the
moon by
the Guarayos
Indians of
Bolivia
and the
Apinagos
Indians of
Brazil.</note>
The Guarayos Indians, who inhabit the gloomy tropical
forests of Eastern Bolivia, lift up their children in the
air at new moon in order that they may grow.<note place='foot'>A. d'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans l'Amérique
Méridionale</hi>, iii. 1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>re</hi> Partie (Paris
and Strasburg, 1844), p. 24.</note> Among
the Apinagos Indians, on the Tocantins River in Brazil, the
French traveller Castelnau witnessed a remarkable dance by
moonlight. The Indians danced in two long ranks which
faced each other, the women on one side, the men on the
other. Between the two ranks of dancers blazed a great
fire. The men were painted in brilliant colours, and for the
most part wore white or red skull-caps made of maize-flour
and resin. Their dancing was very monotonous and consisted
of a jerky movement of the body, while the dancer
advanced first one leg and then the other. This dance they
accompanied with a melancholy song, striking the ground
with their weapons. Opposite them the women, naked and
unpainted, stood in a single rank, their bodies bent slightly
forward, their knees pressed together, their arms swinging in
measured time, now forward, now backward, so as to join
hands. A remarkable figure in the dance was a personage
painted scarlet all over, who held in his hand a rattle composed
of a gourd full of pebbles. From time to time he
leaped across the great fire which burned between the men
and the women. Then he would run rapidly in front of the
women, stopping now and then before one or other and
performing a series of strange gambols, while he shook his
rattle violently. Sometimes he would sink with one knee
to the ground, and then suddenly throw himself backward.
Altogether the agility and endurance which he displayed
were remarkable. This dance lasted for hours. When a
woman was tired out she withdrew, and her place was taken
by another; but the same men danced the monotonous
dance all night. Towards midnight the moon attained the
zenith and flooded the scene with her bright rays. A change
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
now took place in the dance. A long line of men and
women advanced to the fire between the ranks of the
dancers. Each of them held one end of a hammock in
which lay a new-born infant, whose squalls could be heard.
These babes were now to be presented by their parents to
the moon. On reaching the end of the line each couple
swung the hammock, accompanying the movement by a
chant, which all the Indians sang in chorus. The song
seemed to consist of three words, repeated over and over
again. Soon a shrill voice was heard, and a hideous old
hag, like a skeleton, appeared with her arms raised above
her head. She went round and round the assembly several
times, then disappeared in silence. While she was present,
the scarlet dancer with the rattle bounded about more
furiously than ever, stopping only for a moment while he
passed in front of the line of women. His body was contracted
and bent towards them, and described an undulatory
movement like that of a worm writhing. He shook his
rattle violently, as if he would fain kindle in the women the
fire which burned in himself. Then rising abruptly he would
resume his wild career. During this time the loud voice
of an orator was heard from the village repeating a curious
name without cessation. Then the speaker approached
slowly, carrying on his back some gorgeous bunches of
brilliant feathers and under his arm a stone axe. Behind
him walked a young woman bearing an infant in a loose
girdle at her waist; the child was wrapped in a mat, which
protected it against the chill night air. The couple paced
slowly for a minute or two, and then vanished without
speaking a word. At the same moment the curious name
which the orator had shouted was taken up by the whole
assembly and repeated by them again and again. This
scene in its turn lasted a long time, but ceased suddenly
with the setting of the moon. The French traveller who
witnessed it fell asleep, and when he awoke all was calm
once more: there was nothing to recall the infernal dances of
the night.<note place='foot'>F. de Castelnau, <hi rend='italic'>Expédition dans les parties centrales de l'Amérique du
Sud</hi> (Paris, 1850-1851), ii. 31-34.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
presentation
of
infants to
the moon is
probably
intended to
make them
grow.</note>
In explanation of these dances Castelnau merely observes
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
that the Apinagos, like many other South American Indians,
pay a superstitious respect to the moon. We may suppose
that the ceremonious presentation of the infants to the moon
was intended to ensure their life and growth. The names
solemnly chanted by the whole assembly were probably
those which the parents publicly bestowed on their children.
As to the scarlet dancer who leaped across the fire, we may
conjecture that he personated the moon, and that his strange
antics in front of the women were designed to impart to
them the fertilizing virtue of the luminary, and perhaps to
facilitate their delivery.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Baganda
ceremonies
at new
moon.</note>
Among the Baganda of Central Africa there is general
rejoicing when the new moon appears, and no work is done
for seven days. When the crescent is first visible at
evening, mothers take out their babies and hold them at
arms' length, saying, <q>I want my child to keep in health
till the moon wanes.</q> At the same time a ceremony is
performed which may be intended to ensure the king's life
and health throughout the ensuing month. It is a custom
with the Baganda to preserve the king's navel-string with
great care during his life. The precious object is called
the <q>Twin</q> of the king, as if it were his double; and the
ghost of the royal afterbirth is believed to be attached to
it. Enclosed in a pot, which is wrapt in bark cloths, the
navel-string is kept in a temple specially built for it near
the king's enclosure, and a great minister of state acts as its
guardian and priest. Every new moon, at evening, he
carries it in state, wrapped in bark cloths, to the king, who
takes it into his hands, examines it, and returns it to the
minister. The keeper of the navel-string then goes back
with it to the house and sets it in the doorway, where it
remains all night. Next morning it is taken from its
wrappings and again placed in the doorway until the
evening, when it is once more swathed in bark cloths and
restored to its usual place.<note place='foot'>J. Roscoe, <q>Further Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxii. (1902) pp. 63, 76; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Baganda</hi> (London, 1911) pp. 235 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
In the former passage the part of the
king's person which is treated with
this ceremony is said to be the placenta,
not the navel-string.</note> Apparently the navel-string is
conceived as a vital portion, a sort of external soul, of the
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
king; and the attentions bestowed on it at the new moon
may be supposed to refresh and invigorate it, thereby
refreshing and invigorating the king's life.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Baleful
influence
supposed
to be
exercised
by the
moon on
children.</note>
The Armenians appear to think that the moon exercises
a baleful influence on little children. To avert that influence
a mother will show the moon to her child and say,
<q>Thine uncle, thine uncle.</q> For the same purpose the
father and mother will mount to the roof of the house at
new moon on a Wednesday or Friday. The father then
puts the child on a shovel and gives it to the mother, saying,
<q>If it is thine, take it to thee. But if it is mine, rear it and
give it to me back.</q> The mother then takes the child and
the shovel, and returns them to the father in like manner.<note place='foot'>M. Abeghian, <hi rend='italic'>Der armenische
Volksglaube</hi> (Leipsic, 1899), p. 49.</note>
A similar opinion as to the noxious influence of moonshine
on children was apparently held by the ancient Greeks; for
Greek nurses took great care never to show their infants to
the moon.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Conviviales</hi>,
iv. 10. 3. 7.</note> Some Brazilian Indians in like manner guard
babies against the moon, believing that it would make them
ill. Immediately after delivery mothers will hide themselves
and their infants in the thickest parts of the forest in order
that the moonlight may not fall on them.<note place='foot'>J. B. von Spix und C. F. Ph. von
Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Reise in Brasilien</hi> (Munich,
1823-1831), i. 381, iii. 1186.</note> It would be
easy to understand why the waning moon should be deemed
injurious to children; they might be supposed to peak and
pine with its dwindling light. Thus in Angus it is thought
that if a child be weaned during the waning of the moon,
it will decay all the time that the moon continues to
wane.<note place='foot'>J. Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the
Scottish Language</hi>, New Edition edited
by J. Longmuir and D. Donaldson
(Paisley, 1879-1882), iii. 300 (<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Mone</q>).</note> But it is less easy to see why the same deleterious
influence on children should be ascribed to moonlight in
general.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Use of the
moon to
increase
money or
decrease
sickness.</note>
There are many other ways in which people have sought
to turn lunar sympathy to practical account. Clearly the
increase of the moon is the time to increase your goods,
and the decrease of the moon is the time to diminish your
ills. Acting on this imaginary law of nature many persons
in Europe show their money to the new moon or turn it in
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
their pockets at that season, in the belief that the money
will grow with the growth of the planet; sometimes, by way
of additional precaution, they spit on the coin at the same
time.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii.
260; P. Drechsler, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte, Brauch und
Volksglaube in Schlesien</hi>, ii. (Leipsic,
1906) p. 131; W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
of the Northern Counties of England</hi>
(London, 1879), p. 114; C. S.
Burne and G. F. Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire
Folk-lore</hi> (London, 1883), p. 257; W.
Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the North-East of
Scotland</hi> (London, 1881), p. 151.</note> <q>Both Christians and Moslems in Syria turn their
silver money in their pockets at the new moon for luck;
and two persons meeting under the new moon will each
take out a silver coin and embrace, saying, <q>May you begin
and end; and may it be a good month to us.</q></q><note place='foot'>C. R. Conder, <hi rend='italic'>Heth and Moab</hi>
(London, 1883), p. 286.</note> Conversely
the waning of the moon is the most natural time to
get rid of bodily ailments. In Brittany they think that
warts vary with the phases of the moon, growing as it waxes
and vanishing away as it wanes.<note place='foot'>P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions et Superstitions
de la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris,
1882), ii. 355.</note> Accordingly, they say in
Germany that if you would rid yourself of warts you should
treat them when the moon is on the decrease.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi> (Berlin, 1843), p. 387, § 93.</note> And a
German cure for toothache, earache, headache, and so forth,
is to look towards the waning moon and say, <q>As the moon
decreases, so may my pains decrease also.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</hi>
(Chemnitz, 1759), p. 447.</note> However,
some Germans reverse the rule. They say, for example,
that if you are afflicted with a wen, you should face the
waxing moon, lay your finger on the wen, and say thrice,
<q>What I see waxes; what I touch, let it vanish away.</q>
After each of these two sentences you should cross yourself
thrice. Then go home without speaking to any one, and
repeat three paternosters behind the kitchen door.<note place='foot'>F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 302. Compare J.
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
596.</note> The
Huzuls of the Carpathians recommend a somewhat similar,
and no doubt equally efficacious, cure for waterbrash. They
say that at new moon the patient should run thrice round
the house and then say to the moon, <q>Moon, moon, where
wast thou?</q> <q>Behind the mountain.</q> <q>What hast thou
eaten there?</q> <q>Horse flesh.</q> <q>Why hast thou brought
me nothing?</q> <q>Because I forgot.</q> <q>May the waterbrash
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
forget to burn me!</q><note place='foot'>R. F. Kaindl, <q>Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Globus</hi>, lxxvi. (1899)
p. 256.</note> Thus a curative virtue appears to
be attributed by some people to the waning and by others
to the waxing moon. There is perhaps just as much, or as
little, to be said for the one attribution as for the other.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. The King As Osiris.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris
personated
by the
king of
Egypt.</note>
In the foregoing discussion we found reason to believe that
the Semitic Adonis and the Phrygian Attis were at one
time personated in the flesh by kings, princes, or priests who
played the part of the god for a time and then either died
a violent death in the divine character or had to redeem
their life in one way or another, whether by performing a
make-believe sacrifice at some expense of pain and danger
to themselves, or by delegating the duty to a substitute.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 48
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 110, 114, 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 176
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 179 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 285 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Further, we conjectured that in Egypt the part of Osiris
may have been played by the king himself.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It remains to
adduce some positive evidence of this personation.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Sed
festival
celebrated
in Egypt
at intervals
of thirty
years.</note>
A great festival called the Sed was celebrated by the
Egyptians with much solemnity at intervals of thirty years.
Various portions of the ritual are represented on the ancient
monuments of Hieraconpolis and Abydos and in the oldest
decorated temple of Egypt known to us, that of Usirniri at
Busiris, which dates from the fifth dynasty. It appears that
the ceremonies were as old as the Egyptian civilization, and
that they continued to be observed till the end of the Roman
period.<note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Du caractère religieux
de la royauté Pharaonique</hi> (Paris,
1902), pp. 235-238. The festival is
discussed at length by M. Moret (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
pp. 235-273). See further R. Lepsius,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Chronologie der Aegypter</hi>, i. 161-165;
Miss M. A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The Osireion
at Abydos</hi>, pp. 32-34; W. M. Flinders
Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Researches in Sinai</hi> (London,
1906), pp. 176-185. In interpreting
the festival I follow Professor Flinders
Petrie. That the festival occurred, theoretically
at least, at intervals of thirty
years, appears to be unquestionable;
for in the Greek text of the Rosetta
Stone Ptolemy V. is called <q>lord of
periods of thirty years,</q> and though the
corresponding part of the hieroglyphic
text is lost, the demotic version of the
words is <q>master of the years of the
Sed festival.</q> See R. Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> pp. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Dittenberger,
<hi rend='italic'>Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</hi>,
No. 90, line 2 (vol. i. p. 142); A.
Moret, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 260. However, the
kings appear to have sometimes celebrated
the festival at much shorter
intervals, so that the dates of its recurrence
cannot safely be used for
chronological purposes. See Ed.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Nachträge zur ägyptischen
Chronologie</hi> (Berlin, 1908), pp. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königl. Akademie
der Wissenschaften vom Jahre 1907</hi>);
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2.
pp. xix. 130.</note> The reason for holding them at intervals of thirty
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
years is uncertain, but we can hardly doubt that the period
was determined by astronomical considerations. According
to one view, it was based on the observation of Saturn's
period of revolution round the sun, which is, roughly speaking,
thirty years, or, more exactly, twenty-nine years and one
hundred and seventy-four days.<note place='foot'>This was Letronne's theory (R.
Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 163).</note> According to another
view, the thirty years' period had reference to Sirius, the
star of Isis. We have seen that on account of the vague
character of the old Egyptian year the heliacal rising of
Sirius shifted its place gradually through every month of
the calendar.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In one hundred and twenty years the star
thus passed through one whole month of thirty days. To
speak more precisely, it rose on the first of the month during
the first four years of the period: it rose on the second of
the month in the second four years, on the third of the
month in the third four years; and so on successively,
till in the last four years of the hundred and
twenty years it rose on the last day of the month. As the
Egyptians watched the annual summer rising of the star with
attention and associated it with the most popular of their
goddesses, it would be natural that its passage from one
month to another, at intervals of one hundred and twenty
years, should be the occasion of a great festival, and that
the long period of one hundred and twenty years should be
divided into four minor periods of thirty years respectively,
each celebrated by a minor festival.<note place='foot'>This was in substance the theory
of Biot (R. Lepsius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>), and it is the
view of Professor W. M. Flinders Petrie
(<hi rend='italic'>Researches in Sinai</hi>, pp. 176 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note> If this theory of the
Sed festivals is correct, we should expect to find that every
fourth celebration was distinguished from the rest by a
higher degree of solemnity, since it marked the completion
of a twelfth part of the star's journey through the twelve
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
months. Now it appears that in point of fact every fourth
Sed festival was marked off from its fellows by the adjective
<foreign rend='italic'>tep</foreign> or <q>chief,</q> and that these <q>chief</q> celebrations fell as a
rule in the years when Sirius rose on the first of the month.<note place='foot'>W. M. Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Researches
in Sinai</hi>, p. 180.</note>
These facts confirm the view that the Sed festival was closely
connected with the star Sirius, and through it with Isis.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Intention
of the Sed
festival to
renew the
king's life.</note>
However, we are here concerned rather with the meaning
and the rites of the festival than with the reasons for holding
it once every thirty years. The intention of the festival
seems to have been to procure for the king a new lease of
life, a renovation of his divine energies, a rejuvenescence.
In the inscriptions of Abydos we read, after an account of
the rites, the following address to the king: <q>Thou dost
recommence thy renewal, thou art granted to flourish again
like the infant god Moon, thou dost grow young again, and
that from season to season, like Nun at the beginning of
time, thou art born again in renewing the Sed festivals.
All life comes to thy nostril, and thou art king of the whole
earth for ever.</q><note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Du caractère religieux
de la royauté Pharaonique</hi>, pp. 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In short, on these occasions it appears to
have been supposed that the king was in a manner born
again.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The king
identified
with the
dead Osiris
at the Sed
festival.</note>
But how was the new birth effected? Apparently the
essence of the rites consisted in identifying the king with
Osiris; for just as Osiris had died and risen again from the
dead, so the king might be thought to die and to live again
with the god whom he personated. The ceremony would
thus be for the king a death as well as a rebirth. Accordingly
in pictures of the Sed festival on the monuments we
see the king posing as the dead Osiris. He sits in a shrine
like a god, holding in his hands the crook and flail of
Osiris: he is wrapped in tight bandages like the mummified
Osiris; indeed, there is nothing but his name to prove that
he is not Osiris himself. This enthronement of the king in
the attitude of the dead god seems to have been the principal
event of the festival.<note place='foot'>W. M. Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Researches
in Sinai</hi>, p. 181.</note> Further, the queen and the king's
daughters figured prominently in the ceremonies.<note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 240; Miss
M. A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>The Osireion at Abydos</hi>,
pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, with the slip inserted at p.
33; W. Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 184.</note> A
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
discharge of arrows formed part of the rites;<note place='foot'>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 242.</note> and in some
sculptures at Carnac the queen is portrayed shooting arrows
towards the four quarters of the world, while the king
does the same with rings.<note place='foot'>Miss M. A. Murray, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, slip
inserted at p. 33.</note> The oldest illustration of the
festival is on the mace of Narmer, which is believed to date
from 5500 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Here we see the king seated as Osiris in a
shrine at the top of nine steps. Beside the shrine stand fan-bearers,
and in front of it is a figure in a palanquin, which,
according to an inscription in another representation of the
scene, appears to be the royal child. An enclosure of
curtains hung on poles surrounds the dancing-ground, where
three men are performing a sacred dance. A procession of
standards is depicted beside the enclosure; it is headed by
the standard of the jackal-god Up-uat, the <q>opener of ways</q>
for the dead.<note place='foot'>W. M. Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Researches
in Sinai</hi>, p. 183.</note> Similarly on a seal of King Zer, or rather
Khent, one of the early kings of the first dynasty, the
monarch appears as Osiris with the standard of the jackal-god
before him. In front of him, too, is the ostrich feather
on which <q>the dead king was supposed to ascend into heaven.
Here, then, the king, identified with Osiris, king of the dead,
has before him the jackal-god, who leads the dead, and the
ostrich feather, which symbolizes his reception into the sky.</q><note place='foot'>W. M. Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> As to
the king's name (Khent instead of Zer)
see above, p. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, note 1.</note>
There are even grounds for thinking that in order to complete
the mimic death of the king at the Sed festival an effigy of
him, clad in the costume of Osiris, was solemnly buried in a
cenotaph.<note place='foot'>J. Capart, <q>Bulletin critique des
religions de l'Égypte,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire
des Religions</hi>, liii. (1906) pp.
332-334. I have to thank Professor
W. M. Flinders Petrie for calling my
attention to this passage.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Professor
Flinders
Petrie's
explanation
of the Sed
festival.</note>
According to Professor Flinders Petrie, <q>the conclusion
may be drawn thus. In the savage age of prehistoric
times, the Egyptians, like many other African and Indian
peoples, killed their priest-king at stated intervals, in order
that the ruler should, with unimpaired life and health, be
enabled to maintain the kingdom in its highest condition.
The royal daughters were present in order that they might
be married to his successor. The jackal-god went before
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
him, to open the way to the unseen world; and the ostrich
feather received and bore away the king's soul in the breeze
that blew it out of sight. This was the celebration of the
<q>end,</q> the <foreign rend='italic'>sed</foreign> feast. The king thus became the dead king,
patron of all those who had died in his reign, who were his
subjects here and hereafter. He was thus one with Osiris,
the king of the dead. This fierce custom became changed,
as in other lands, by appointing a deputy king to die in his
stead; which idea survived in the Coptic Abu Nerūs, with
his tall crown of Upper Egypt, false beard, and sceptre.
After the death of the deputy, the real king renewed his
life and reign. Henceforward this became the greatest of
the royal festivals, the apotheosis of the king during his life,
after which he became Osiris upon earth and the patron of
the dead in the underworld.</q><note place='foot'>W. M. Flinders Petrie, <hi rend='italic'>Researches
in Sinai</hi>, p. 185. As to the Coptic
mock-king see C. B. Klunzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Bilder
aus Oberägypten, der Wüste und dem
Rothen Meere</hi> (Stuttgart, 1877), pp.
180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
For examples of human sacrifices
offered to prolong the lives of kings
see below, vol. ii. pp. 219 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Alexandre
Moret's
theory that
at the Sed
festivals
the king
was supposed
to
die and to
be born
again.</note>
A similar theory of the Sed festival is maintained by
another eminent Egyptologist, M. Alexandre Moret. He
says: <q rend='pre'>In most of the temples of Egypt, of all periods,
pictures set forth for us the principal scenes of a solemn
festival called <q>festival of the tail,</q> the Sed festival. It consisted
essentially in a representation of the ritual death of the
king followed by his rebirth. In this case the king is identified
with Osiris, the god who in historical times is the hero
of the sacred drama of humanity, he who guides us through
the three stages of life, death, and rebirth in the other world.
Hence, clad in the funeral costume of Osiris, with the tight-fitting
garment clinging to him like a shroud, Pharaoh is conducted
to the tomb; and from it he returns rejuvenated and
reborn like Osiris emerging from the dead. How was this
fiction carried out? how was this miracle performed? By
the sacrifice of human or animal victims. On behalf of the
king a priest lay down in the skin of the animal victim: he
assumed the posture characteristic of an embryo in its
mother's womb: when he came forth from the skin he was
deemed to be reborn; and Pharaoh, for whom this rite was
celebrated, was himself reborn, or to adopt the Egyptian expression,
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
<q>he renewed his births.</q> And in testimony of the
due performance of the rites the king girt his loins with the
tail, a compendious representative of the skin of the sacrificed
beast, whence the name of <q>the festival of the tail.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How are we to explain the rule that at a certain point
of his reign every Pharaoh must undergo this ritual death
followed by fictitious rebirth? Is it simply a renewal of the
initiation into the Osirian mysteries? or does the festival
present some more special features? The ill-defined part
played by the royal children in these rites seems to me to
indicate that the Sed festival represents other episodes which
refer to the transmission of the regal office. At the dawn
of civilization in Egypt the people were perhaps familiar
with the alternative either of putting their king to death in
his full vigour in order that his power should be transmitted
intact to his successor, or of attempting to rejuvenate
him and to <q>renew his life.</q> The latter measure was an
invention of the Pharaohs. How could it be carried out
more effectively than by identifying themselves with Osiris,
by applying to themselves the process of resurrection, the
funeral rites by which Isis, according to the priests, had
magically saved her husband from death? Perhaps the
fictitious death of the king may be regarded as a mitigation
of the primitive murder of the divine king, a transition from
a barbarous reality to symbolism.</q><note place='foot'><p>A. Moret, <hi rend='italic'>Mystères Égyptiens</hi>
(Paris, 1913), pp. 187-190. For a
detailed account of the Egyptian evidence,
monumental and inscriptional,
on which M. Moret bases his view of
the king's rebirth by deputy from the
hide of a sacrificed animal, see pp. 16
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 72 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> of the same work. Compare
his article, <q>Du sacrifice en
Égypte,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</hi>,
lvii. (1908) pp. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In support
of the view that the king of Egypt
was deemed to be born again at the Sed
festival it has been pointed out that on
these solemn occasions, as we learn
from the monuments, there was carried
before the king on a pole an object
shaped like a placenta, a part of the
human body which many savage or
barbarous peoples regard as the twin
brother or sister of the new-born child.
See C. G. Seligmann and Margaret A.
Murray, <q>Note upon an early
Egyptian standard,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, xi. (1911)
pp. 165-171. The object which these
writers take to represent a human
placenta is interpreted by M. Alexandre
Moret as the likeness of a human
embryo. As to the belief that the
afterbirth is a twin brother or sister
of the infant, see above, vol. i. p. 93,
and below, pp. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The Magic
Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>, i.
82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
</p>
<p>
Professor J. H. Breasted thinks that
the Sed festival is probably <q>the oldest
religious feast of which any trace has
been preserved in Egypt</q>; he admits
that on these occasions <q>the king
assumed the costume and insignia of
Osiris, and undoubtedly impersonated
him,</q> and further that <q>one of the
ceremonies of this feast symbolized
the resurrection of Osiris</q>; but he
considers that the significance of the
festival is as yet obscure. See J. H.
Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>Development of Religion and
Thought in Ancient Egypt</hi> (London,
1912), p. 39.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Osiris
personated
by the
king of
Egypt.</note>
Whether this interpretation of the Sed festival be
accepted in all its details or not, one thing seems quite
certain: on these solemn occasions the god Osiris was personated
by the king of Egypt himself. That is the point
with which we are here chiefly concerned.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. The Origin of Osiris.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>How did
the conception
of
Osiris as a
god of
vegetation
and of the
dead
originate?</note>
Thus far we have discussed the character of Osiris as he is
presented to us in the art and literature of Egypt and in the
testimonies of Greek writers; and we have found that judged
by these indications he was in the main a god of vegetation
and of the dead. But we have still to ask, how did the conception
of such a composite deity originate? Did it arise
simply through observation of the great annual fluctuations
of the seasons and a desire to explain them? Was it a
result of brooding over the mystery of external nature?
Was it the attempt of a rude philosophy to lift the veil and
explore the hidden springs that set the vast machine in
motion? That man at a very early stage of his long history
meditated on these things and evolved certain crude theories
which partially satisfied his craving after knowledge is
certain; from such meditations of Babylonian and Phrygian
sages appear to have sprung the pathetic figures of Adonis
and Attis; and from such meditations of Egyptian sages
may have sprung the tragic figure of Osiris.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>While
Adonis and
Attis were
subordinate
figures
in their
respective
pantheons,
Osiris was
the greatest
and most
popular
god of
Egypt.</note>
Yet a broad distinction seems to sever the myth and
worship of Osiris from the kindred myths and worships of
Adonis and Attis. For while Adonis and Attis were minor
divinities in the religion of Western Asia, completely overshadowed
by the greater deities of their respective pantheons,
the solemn figure of Osiris towered in solitary grandeur over
all the welter of Egyptian gods, like a pyramid of his native
land lit up by the last rays of the setting sun when all
below it is in shadow. And whereas legend generally represented
Adonis and Attis as simple swains, mere herdsmen
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
or hunters whom the fatal love of a goddess had elevated
above their homely sphere into a brief and melancholy pre-eminence,
Osiris uniformly appears in tradition as a great
and beneficent king. In life, he ruled over his people,
beloved and revered for the benefits he conferred on them
and on the world; in death he reigned in their hearts and
memories as lord of the dead, the awful judge at whose bar
every man must one day stand to give an account of the
deeds done in the body and to receive the final award. In
the faith of the Egyptians the cruel death and blessed
resurrection of Osiris occupied the same place as the death
and resurrection of Christ hold in the faith of Christians.
As Osiris died and rose again from the dead, so they hoped
through him and in his dear name to wake triumphant from
the sleep of death to a blissful eternity. That was their
sheet-anchor in life's stormy sea; that was the hope which
supported and consoled millions of Egyptian men and
women for a period of time far longer than that during
which Christianity has now existed on earth. In the long
history of religion no two divine figures resemble each
other more closely in the fervour of personal devotion which
they have kindled and in the high hopes which they have
inspired than Osiris and Christ. The sad figure of Buddha
indeed has been as deeply loved and revered by countless
millions; but he had no glad tidings of immortality for men,
nothing but the promise of a final release from the burden
of mortality.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
personal
devotion
of the
Egyptians
to Osiris
suggests
that he
may have
been a real
man; for
all the permanent
religious
or semi-religious
systems of
the world
have been
founded by
individual
great men.</note>
And if Osiris and Christ have been the centres of the
like enthusiastic devotion, may not the secret of their influence
have been similar? If Christ lived the life and died
the death of a man on earth, may not Osiris have done so
likewise? The immense and enduring popularity of his
worship speaks in favour of the supposition; for all the
other great religious or semi-religious systems which have
won for themselves a permanent place in the affections of
mankind, have been founded by individual great men, who
by their personal life and example exerted a power of
attraction such as no cold abstractions, no pale products of
the collective wisdom or folly could ever exert on the minds
and hearts of humanity. Thus it was with Buddhism, with
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
Confucianism, with Christianity, and with Mohammedanism;
and thus it may well have been with the religion of Osiris.
Certainly we shall do less violence to the evidence if we
accept the unanimous tradition of ancient Egypt on this
point than if we resolve the figure of Osiris into a myth pure
and simple. And when we consider that from the earliest
to the latest times Egyptian kings were worshipped as gods
both in life and in death, there appears to be nothing extravagant
or improbable in the view that one of them by his
personal qualities excited a larger measure of devotion than
usual during his life and was remembered with fonder affection
and deeper reverence after his death; till in time his
beloved memory, dimmed, transfigured, and encircled with a
halo of glory by the mists of time, grew into the dominant
religion of his people. At least this theory is reasonable
enough to deserve a serious consideration. If we accept it,
we may suppose that the mythical elements, which legend
undoubtedly ascribed to Osiris, were later accretions which
gathered about his memory like ivy about a ruin. There is
no improbability in such a supposition; on the contrary, all
analogy is in its favour, for nothing is more certain than
that myths grow like weeds round the great historical figures
of the past.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
historical
reality of
Osiris as an
old king of
Egypt can
be supported
by
modern
African
analogies.</note>
In recent years the historical reality of Osiris as a king
who once lived and reigned in Egypt has been maintained
by more than one learned scholar;<note place='foot'>It is maintained by the discoverer
of the tomb of Osiris at Abydos,
Monsieur E. Amélineau, in his work
<hi rend='italic'>Le Tombeau d'Osiris</hi> (Paris, 1899) and
by Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge in his
elaborate treatise <hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian
Resurrection</hi>, in which the author
pays much attention to analogies drawn
from the religion and customs of modern
African tribes.</note> and without venturing
to pronounce a decided opinion on so obscure and difficult a
question, I think it worth while, following the example of
Dr. Wallis Budge, to indicate certain modern African analogies
which tend to confirm the view that beneath the
mythical wrappings of Osiris there lay the mummy of a
dead man. At all events the analogies which I shall cite
suffice to prove that the custom of worshipping dead kings
has not been confined to Egypt, but has been apparently
widespread throughout Africa, though the evidence now at
our disposal only enables us to detect the observance of the
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
custom at a few points of the great continent. But even if
the resemblance in this respect between ancient Egypt and
modern Africa should be regarded as established, it would
not justify us in inferring an ethnical affinity between the
fair or ruddy Egyptians and the black aboriginal races
who occupy almost the whole of Africa except a comparatively
narrow fringe on the northern sea-board. Scholars
are still divided on the question of the original home and
racial relationship of the ancient Egyptians. It has been
held on the one hand that they belong to an indigenous
white race which has been always in possession of the
Mediterranean coasts of Africa; and on the other hand
it has been supposed that they are akin to the Semites
in blood as well as in language, and that they entered
Africa from the East, whether by gradual infiltration or
on a sudden wave of conquest like the Arabs in the
decline of the Roman empire.<note place='foot'>G. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne
des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</hi>, i. 43
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
Ancient Egyptians</hi>, pp. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ed.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2.
pp. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The affinity of the Egyptian
language to the Semitic family of
speech seems now to be admitted even
by historians who maintain the African
origin of the Egyptians.</note> On either view a great gulf
divided them from the swarthy natives of the Sudan, with
whom they were always in contact on their southern border;
and though a certain admixture may have taken place
through marriage between the two races, it seems unsafe to
assume that the religious and political resemblances which
can be traced between them are based on any closer relationship
than the general similarity in structure and functions
of the human mind.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
spirits of
dead kings
worshipped
by the
Shilluks
of the
White
Nile.
Sacrifices
to the
dead kings.</note>
In a former part of this work we saw that the Shilluks,
a pastoral and partially agricultural people of the White
Nile, worship the spirits of their dead kings.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The
information there given was kindly supplied
by Dr. C. G. Seligmann, who has
since published it with fuller details.
See C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>The Cult of
Nyakang and the Divine Kings of the
Shilluk</hi> (Khartoum, 1911), pp. 216-232
(reprint from <hi rend='italic'>Fourth Report of the
Wellcome Tropical Research Laboratories,
Gordon Memorial College, Khartoum</hi>);
W. Hofmayr, <q>Religion der
Schilluk,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, vi. (1911) pp.
120-131; Diedrich Westermann, <hi rend='italic'>The
Shilluk People, their Language and Folk-lore</hi>
(Berlin, preface dated 1912), pp.
xxxix. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In what follows I have
drawn on all these authorities.</note> The graves
of the deceased monarchs form indeed the national or tribal
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
temples; and as each king is interred at the village where
he was born and where his afterbirth is buried, these grave-shrines
are scattered over the country. Each of them
usually comprises a small group of round huts, resembling
the common houses of the people, the whole being enclosed
by a fence; one of the huts is built over the grave, the
others are occupied by the guardians of the shrine, who at
first are generally the widows or old men-servants of the
deceased king. When these women or retainers die, they
are succeeded in office by their descendants, for the tombs
are maintained in perpetuity, so that the number of
temples and of gods is always on the increase. Cattle are
dedicated to these royal shrines and animals sacrificed at
them. For example, when the millet crop threatens to fail
or a murrain breaks out among the beasts, one of the dead
kings will appear to somebody in a dream and demand a
sacrifice. The dream is reported to the king, and he
immediately orders a bullock and a cow to be sent to the
grave of the dead king who appeared in a vision of the
night to the sleeper. This is done; the bullock is killed and
the cow added to the sacred herd of the shrine. It is
customary, also, though not necessary, at harvest to offer
some of the new millet at the temple-tombs of the kings;
and sick people send animals to be sacrificed there on their
behalf. Special regard is paid to trees that grow near
the graves of the kings; and the spirits of the departed
monarchs are believed to appear from time to time in the
form of certain animals. One of them, for example, always
takes the shape of a certain insect, which seems to be the
larva of the <foreign rend='italic'>Mantidae</foreign>. When a Shilluk finds one of these
insects, he will take it up in his hands and deposit it reverentially
at the shrine. Other kings manifest themselves as a
certain species of white birds; others assume the form of
giraffes. When one of these long-legged and long-necked
creatures comes stalking up fearlessly to a village where
there is a king's grave, the people know that the king's soul
is in the animal, and the attendants at the royal tomb testify
their joy at the appearance of their master by sacrificing a
sheep or even a bullock.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Worship of
Nyakang,
the first
of the
Shilluk
kings.</note>
But of all the dead kings none is revered so deeply or
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
occupies so large a place in the minds of the people as
Nyakang, the traditional founder of the dynasty and the
ancestor of all the kings who have reigned after him to the
present day. Of these kings the Shilluks have preserved
the memory and the genealogy; twenty-six seem to have
sat on the throne since Nyakang, but the period of time
covered by their reigns is much shorter than it would have
been under conditions such as now prevail in Europe; for
down to the time when their country came under British
rule it was the regular custom of the Shilluks to put their
kings to death as soon as they showed serious symptoms of
bodily or mental decay. The custom was based on <q>the
conviction that the king must not be allowed to become ill
or senile, lest with his diminishing vigour the cattle should
sicken and fail to bear their increase, the crops should rot in
the fields, and man, stricken with disease, should die in ever-increasing
numbers.</q><note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>The Cult of
Nyakang</hi>, p. 221.</note> It is said that Nyakang, like Romulus,
disappeared in a great storm, which scattered all the people
about him; in their absence the king took a cloth, tied it
tightly round his neck, and strangled himself. According
to one account, that is the death which all his successors on
the throne have died;<note place='foot'>D. Westermann, <hi rend='italic'>The Shilluk
People</hi>, p. xlii.</note> but while tradition appears to be
unanimous as to the custom of regicide, it varies as to the
precise mode in which the kings were relieved of their office
and of life. But still the people are convinced that Nyakang
did not really die but only vanished mysteriously away like
the wind. When a missionary asked the Shilluks as to the
manner of Nyakang's death, they were filled with amazement
at his ignorance and stoutly maintained that he never died, for
were he to die all the Shilluks would die also.<note place='foot'>D. Westermann, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> The graves
of this deified king are shown in various parts of the country.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
spirit of
Nyakang
supposed
to manifest
itself in
certain
animals.</note>
From time to time the spirit of Nyakang manifests itself
to his people in the form of an animal. Any creature of
regal port or surpassing beauty may serve as his temporary
incarnation. Such among wild animals are lions, crocodiles,
little yellow snakes that crawl about men's houses, the finest
sorts of antelopes, flamingoes with their rose-pink and scarlet
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
plumage, and butterflies of all sorts with their brilliant and
varied hues. An unusually fine head of cattle is also
recognized as the abode of the great king's soul; for example
he once appeared in the shape of a white bull, whereupon
the living king commanded special sacrifices to be offered in
honour of his deified predecessor. When a bird in which the
royal spirit is known to be lodged lights on a tree, that tree
becomes sacred to Nyakang; beads and cloths are hung on its
boughs, sacrifices and prayers are offered below it. Once when
the Turks unknowingly felled such a tree, fear and horror fell
on the Shilluks who beheld the sacrilege. They filled the air
with lamentations and killed an ox to appease their insulted
ancestor.<note place='foot'>W. Hofmayr, <q>Religion der Schilluk,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Anthropos</hi>, vi. (1911) pp. 123 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 230; D.
Westermann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. xliii.</note> Particular regard is also paid to trees that grow
near the graves of Nyakang, though they are not regularly
worshipped.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 229 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In one place two gigantic baobab trees are
pointed out as marking the spot where Nyakang once stood,
and sacrifices are now offered under their spreading shade.<note place='foot'>W. Hofmayr, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 125.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The deified
Nyakang
seems to
have been
a real man. Relation of
Nyakang
to the
creator
Juok.</note>
There seems to be no doubt that in spite of the mythical
elements which have gathered round his memory, Nyakang
was a real man, who led the Shilluks to their present home
on the Nile either from the west or from the south; for on
this point tradition varies. <q>The first and most important
ancestor, who is everywhere revered, is Nyakang, the first
Shilluk king. He always receives the honourable titles of
Father (<foreign rend='italic'>uò</foreign>), Ancestor (<foreign rend='italic'>qua</foreign>), King (<foreign rend='italic'>red</foreign>) or Kings (<foreign rend='italic'>ror</foreign>),
Ancestors, and Great Man Above (<foreign rend='italic'>čal duong mal</foreign>) to distinguish
him from the other great men on earth. Nyakang, as
we know, was an historical personage; he led the Shilluks
to the land which they now occupy; he helped them to
victory, made them great and warlike, regulated marriage
and law, distributed the country among them, divided it into
districts, and in order to increase the dependence of the
people on him and to show them his power, became their
greatest benefactor by giving himself out as the bestower
of rain.</q><note place='foot'>W. Hofmayr, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 123.
This writer spells the name of the
deified king as Nykang. I have adopted
Dr. Seligmann's spelling.</note> Yet Nyakang is now universally revered by
the people as a demi-god; indeed for all practical purposes
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
his worship quite eclipses that of the supreme god
Juok, the creator, who, having ordered the world, committed
it to the care of ancestral spirits and demons, and now,
dwelling aloft, concerns himself no further with human affairs.
Hence men pay little heed to their creator and seldom take
his name into their lips except in a few conventional forms of
salutation at meeting and parting like our <q>Good-bye.</q> Far
otherwise is it with Nyakang. He <q>is the ancestor of the
Shilluk nation and the founder of the Shilluk dynasty. He
is worshipped, sacrifices and prayers are offered to him; he
may be said to be lifted to the rank of a demi-god, though
they never forget that he has been a real man. He is
expressly designated as <q>little</q> in comparison with God.</q>
Yet <q>in the political, religious and personal life Nyakang
takes a far more important place than Juok. Nyakang is
the national hero, of whom each Shilluk feels proud, who is
praised in innumerable popular songs and sayings; he is not
only a superior being, but also a man. He is the sublime
model for every true Shilluk; everything they value most in
their national and private life has its origin in him: their
kingdom and their fighting as well as cattle-breeding and
farming. While Nyakang is their good father, who only
does them good, Juok is the great, uncontrollable power,
which is to be propitiated, in order to avoid his inflictions of
evil.</q><note place='foot'>Diederich Westermann, <hi rend='italic'>The Shilluk
People, their Language and Folklore</hi>
(Berlin, preface dated 1912), pp. xlii,
xliii. Mr. Westermann gives the names
of the demi-god and the god as Nyikang
and Jwok respectively. For the sake
of uniformity I have altered them to
Nyakang and Juok, the forms adopted
by Dr. C. G. Seligmann.</note> Indeed <q>the whole working religion of the Shilluk
is a cult of Nyakang, the semi-divine ancestor of their kings,
in each of whom his spirit is immanent.</q><note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>The Cult of
Nyakang and the Divine Kings of the
Shilluk</hi> (Khartoum, 1911), p. 220.</note> The transmission
of the divine or semi-divine spirit of Nyakang to the reigning
monarch appears to take place at the king's installation and
to be effected by means of a rude wooden effigy of Nyakang,
in which the spirit of that deified man is perhaps supposed
to be immanent. But however the spiritual transmission
may be carried out, <q>the fundamental idea of the cult of the
Shilluk divine kings is the immanence in each of the spirit of
Nyakang.</q><note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
231.</note> Thus the Shilluk kings are encircled with a
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
certain halo of divinity because they are thought to be
animated by the divine spirit of their ancestor, the founder
of the dynasty.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The belief
in the
former
humanity
of Nyakang
is confirmed
by
the analogy
of his
worship to
that of the
dead
Shilluk
kings.</note>
The universal belief of the Shilluks in the former
humanity of Nyakang is strongly confirmed by the exact
parallelism which prevails between his worship and that of
the dead kings his successors. Like them he is worshipped
at his tomb; but unlike them he has not one tomb
only, but ten scattered over the country. Each of these
tombs is called <q>the grave of Nyakang,</q> though the people
well know that nobody is buried there. Like the grave-shrines
of the other kings, those of Nyakang consist of a
small group of circular huts of the ordinary pattern enclosed
by a fence. Only children under puberty and the few old
people whose duty it is to take care of the shrines may
enter these sacred enclosures. The rites performed at them
resemble those observed at the shrines of the kings. Two
great ceremonies are annually performed at the shrines of
Nyakang: one is observed before the beginning of the
rainy season in order to ensure a due supply of rain;
the other is a thanksgiving at harvest, when porridge
made from the new grain is poured out on the threshold
of Nyakang's hut and smeared on the outer walls of the
building. Even before the millet is reaped the people
cut some of the ripening ears and thrust them into the
thatch of the sacred hut. Thus it would seem that the
Shilluks believe themselves to be dependent on the favour
of Nyakang for the rain and the crops. <q>As the giver of
rain, Nyakang is the first and greatest benefactor of the
people. In that country rain is everything, without rain
there is nothing. The Shilluk does not trouble his head
about artificial irrigation, he waits for the rain. If the rain
falls, then the millet grows, the cows thrive, man has food
and can dance and marry; for that is the ideal of the
Shilluks.</q><note place='foot'>W. Hofmayr, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 125.
<q>It must be remembered that the due
growth of the crops, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> of the most
important part of the vegetable world,
depends on the well-being of the divine
king</q> (C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 229).</note> Sick people also bring or send sheep as an
offering to the nearest shrine of Nyakang in order that they
may be healed of their sickness. The attendants of the
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
sanctuary slaughter the animal, consume its flesh, and give
the sufferer the benefit of their prayers.<note place='foot'>C. G. Seligmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
227.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Comparison
of
Nyakang
with Osiris.</note>
The example of Nyakang seems to show that under
favourable circumstances the worship of a dead king may
develop into the dominant religion of a people. There is,
therefore, no intrinsic improbability in the view that in
ancient Egypt the religion of Osiris originated in that
way. Certainly some curious resemblances can be traced
between the dead Nyakang and the dead Osiris. Both
died violent and mysterious deaths: the graves of both
were pointed out in many parts of the country: both were
deemed the great sources of fertility for the whole land:
and both were associated with certain sacred trees and
animals, particularly with bulls. And just as Egyptian
kings identified themselves both in life and in death with
their deified predecessor Osiris, so Shilluk kings are still
believed to be animated by the spirit of their deified predecessor
Nyakang and to share his divinity.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The spirits
of dead
kings worshipped
by the
Baganda of
Central
Africa.</note>
Another African people who regularly worship, or rather
used to worship, the spirits of their dead kings are the
Baganda. Their country Uganda lies at the very source of
the Nile, where the great river issues from Lake Victoria
Nyanza. Among them the ghosts of dead kings were placed
on an equality with the gods and received the same honour
and worship; they foretold events which concerned the State,
and they advised the living king, warning him when war was
likely to break out. The king consulted them periodically,
visiting first one and then another of the temples in which
the mortal remains of his predecessors were preserved with
religious care. But the temple (<foreign rend='italic'>malolo</foreign>) of a king contained
only his lower jawbone and his navel-string (<foreign rend='italic'>mulongo</foreign>); his
body was buried elsewhere.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 283.</note> For curiously enough the
Baganda believed that the part of the body to which the
ghost of a dead man adheres above all others is the lower
jawbone; wherever that portion of his person may be
carried, the ghost, in the opinion of these people, will follow
it, even to the ends of the earth, and will be perfectly
content to remain with it so long as the jawbone is
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
honoured.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 113,
282.</note> Hence the jawbones of all the kings of Uganda
from the earliest times to the present day have been preserved
with the utmost care, each of them being deposited, along
with the stump of the monarch's navel-string, in a temple
specially dedicated to the worship of the king's ghost; for
it is believed that the ghosts of the deceased monarchs
would quarrel if they shared the same temple, the question
of precedence being one which it would be very difficult
for them to adjust to their mutual satisfaction.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 110,
282, 285.</note> All the
temples of the dead kings stand in the district called Busiro,
which means the place of the graves, because the tombs as
well as the temples of the departed potentates are situated
within its boundaries. The supervision of the temples and
of the estates attached to them was a duty incumbent on
the <foreign rend='italic'>Mugema</foreign> or earl of Busiro, one of the few hereditary
chiefs in the country. His principal office was that of
Prime Minister (<foreign rend='italic'>Katikiro</foreign>) to the dead kings.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 104,
252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. F. Cunningham, <hi rend='italic'>Uganda
and its People</hi> (London, 1905), p.
226.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Tombs of
the dead
kings of
Uganda.</note>
When a king dies, his body is sent to Busiro and there
embalmed. Then it is laid to rest in a large round house,
which has been built for its reception on the top of a hill.
This is the king's tomb. It is a conical structure supported
by a central post, with a thatched roof reaching down to
the ground. Round the hut a high strong fence of reeds
is erected, and an outer fence encircles the whole at some
distance lower down the hill. Here the body is placed on
a bedstead; the sepulchral chamber is filled with bark cloths
till it can hold no more, the mainpost is cut down, and the
door of the tomb closed, so that no one can enter it again.
When that was done, the wives of the late king used to be
brought, with their arms pinioned, and placed at intervals
round the outer wall of the tomb, where they were clubbed
to death. Hundreds of men were also killed in the space
between the two fences, that their ghosts might wait on the
ghost of the dead king in the other world. None of their
bodies were buried; they were left to rot where they fell.
Then the gates in the fences were closed; and three chiefs
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
with their men guarded the dead bodies from the wild
beasts and the vultures. But the hut in which the king's
body reposed was never repaired; it was allowed to moulder
and fall into decay.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 104-107, <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxi. (1901) p. 129; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Further Notes on the Manners and
Customs of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, xxxii.
(1902) pp. 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Compare L. F.
Cunningham, <hi rend='italic'>Uganda and its People</hi>
(London, 1905), pp. 224, 226.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ghosts of
the dead
kings of
Uganda
supposed
to adhere
to their
lower jawbones
and
their navel-strings,
which are
accordingly
preserved
in
temples
dedicated
to the worship
of the
kings.</note>
Five months later the jawbone of the royal corpse was
removed in order to be fashioned into an effigy or representative
of the dead king. For this purpose three chiefs
entered the tomb, not through the door, but by cutting a hole
through the wall, and having severed the head from the
body they brought it out, carefully filling up the hole in the
wall behind them, replacing the thatch, and securing the
gates in the fence. When the jawbone had been removed
by a chief of the Civet clan, the skull was sent back to Busiro
and buried with honour near the mouldering tomb. In
contrast to the neglect of the tomb where the royal body
lay, the place where the skull was buried was kept in good
repair and guarded by some of the old princesses and
widows. As for the jawbone, it was put in an ant-hill and
left there till the ants had eaten away all the flesh. Then,
after it had been washed in beer and milk, it was decorated
with cowry-shells and placed in a wooden vessel; this vessel
was next wrapt in bark cloths till it assumed a conical
shape, about two and a half feet high by a foot and a half
broad at the base. This conical packet, decorated on the
outside with beads, was treated as an image of the deceased
king or rather as if it were the king himself in life, for it
was called simply <q>The King.</q> Beside it was placed the
stump of the king's navel-string, similarly wrapt in bark
cloths and decorated, though not made up into a conical
shape.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The reason for preserving both the jawbone and
the navel-string was that the ghost of the king was supposed
to attach itself to his jawbone, and the ghost of his
double to his navel-string. For in the belief of the Baganda
every person has a double, namely, the afterbirth or placenta,
which is born immediately after him and is regarded by the
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
people as a second child. Now that double has a ghost of
its own, which adheres to the navel-string; and if the
person is to remain healthy, it is essential that the ghost of
his double should be carefully preserved. Hence every
Baganda man and woman keeps his or her navel-string
wrapt up in bark cloth as a treasure of great price on which
his health and prosperity are dependent; the precious little
bundle is called his Twin (<foreign rend='italic'>mulongo</foreign>), because it contains the
ghost of his double, the afterbirth. If that is deemed
necessary for everybody, much more is it deemed essential
for the welfare of the king; hence during his life the stump
of his navel-string is kept, as we saw,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>.</note> by one of the
principal ministers of state and is inspected by the king
himself every month. And when his majesty has departed
this life, the unity of his spirit imperatively demands that
his own ghost and the ghost of his double should be kept
together in the same place; that is why the jawbone and
the navel-string of every dead king are carefully preserved
in the same temple, because the two ghosts adhere respectively
to these two parts of his person, and it would be
unreasonable and indeed cruel to divide them.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Kibuka, the
War God of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, vii.
(1907) pp. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 235 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
temples
of the
dead kings
of Uganda.</note>
The two ghosts having been thus safely lodged in the
two precious parcels, the next thing was to install them in
the temple, where they were to enter on their career of
beneficent activity. A site having been chosen, the whole
country supplied the labour necessary for building the
temple; and ministers were appointed to wait upon the
dead king. The officers of state who had held important
posts during his life retained their titles and continued to
discharge their duties towards their old master in death.
Accordingly houses were built for them near the temple.
The dowager queen also took up her residence at the
entrance to the temple enclosure, and became its principal
guardian. Many also of the king's widows of lower rank
were drafted off to live inside the enclosure and keep
watch over it. When the queen or any of these widows
died, her place was supplied by another princess or a
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
woman of the same clan; for the temple was maintained in
perpetuity. However, when the reigning king died, the
temple of his predecessor lost much of its importance,
though it was still kept up in a less magnificent style;
indeed no temple of a dead king was allowed to disappear
altogether.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 110-112, 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Of all the attendants at the temple the most
important probably was the prophet or medium (<foreign rend='italic'>mandwa</foreign>),
whose business it was from time to time to be inspired by
the ghost of the deceased monarch and to give oracles in
his name. To this holy office he dedicated himself by
drinking a draught of beer and a draught of milk out of
the dead king's skull.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxi. (1901) pp. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<q>Further Notes on the Manners and
Customs of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, xxxii.
(1902) p. 45.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Oracles
given by
the dead
kings of
Uganda
by the
mouth of
an inspired
prophet.</note>
The temple consecrated to the worship of a king regularly
stood on a hill. The site was generally chosen by the king
in his life, but sometimes his choice was set aside by his
successor, who gave orders to build the temple in another
place.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
p. 283.</note> The structure was a large conical or bee-hive-shaped
hut of the ordinary pattern, divided internally into two
chambers, an outer and an inner. Any person might enter
the outer chamber, but the inner was sacred and no profane
person might set foot in it; for there the holy relics of the
dead king, his jawbone and his navel-string, were kept for
safety in a cell dug in the floor, and there, in close attendance
on them, the king's ghost was believed to dwell. In front
of the partition which screened this Holy of Holies from the
gaze of the multitude there stood a throne, covered with lion
and leopard skins and fenced off from the rest of the sacred
edifice by a glittering rail of brass spears, shields, and knives.
A forest of poles, supporting the roof, formed a series of aisles
in perfect line, and at the end of the central nave appeared,
like the altar of a Christian church, the throne in all its
glory. When the king's ghost held a reception, the holy
relics, the jawbone and the navel-string, each in its decorated
wrappings, were brought forth and set on the throne; and
every person who entered the temple bowed to the ground
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
and greeted the jawbone in an awestruck voice, for he
regarded it as the king in person. Solemn music played
during the reception, the drums rolling and the women
chanting, while they clapped their hands to the rhythm of
the songs. Sometimes the dead king spoke to the congregation
by the voice of his prophet. That was a great event.
When the oracle was about to be given to the expectant
throng, the prophet stepped up to the throne, and addressing
the spirit informed him of the business in hand. Then he
smoked one or two pipes, and the fumes bringing on the
prophetic fit, he began to rave and to speak in the very
voice and with the characteristic turns of speech of the
departed monarch, for the king's spirit was now in him.
This message from the world beyond the grave was naturally
received with rapt attention. Gradually the fit of inspiration
passed: the voice of the prophet resumed its natural
tones: the spirit had departed from him and returned to its
abode in the inner room. Such a solemn audience used to
be announced beforehand by the beating of the drums in
the early morning, and the worshippers brought with them
to the temple offerings of food for the dead king, as if he
were still alive.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Notes on the
Manners and Customs of the Baganda,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxi. (1901) p. 130; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Further
Notes on the Manners and Customs
of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, xxxii. (1902)
p. 46; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>, pp. 283-285.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Visit paid
by the
living king
to the
temple of
his dead
father. Human
victims
sacrificed
in order
that their
ghosts
might serve
the ghost
of the dead
king.</note>
But the greatest day of all was when the reigning king
visited the temple of his father. This he did as a rule only
once during his reign. Nor did the people approve of the
visits being repeated, for each visit was the signal for the
death of many. Yet, attracted by a painful curiosity, crowds
assembled, followed the monarch to the temple, and thronged
to see the great ceremony of the meeting between the king
and the ghost of his royal father. The sacred relics were
displayed: an old man explained them to the monarch and
placed them in his hands: the prophet, inspired by the dead
king's spirit, revealed to the living king his destiny. The
interview over, the king was carried back to his house. It
was on the return journey that he always gave, suddenly
and without warning, the signal of death. Obedient to his
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
orders the guards rushed upon the crowd, captured hundreds
of spectators, pinioned them, marched them back to the
temple, and slaughtered them within the precincts, that their
ghosts might wait on the ghost of the dead king.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 112, 284.</note> But
though the king rarely visited his father's ghost at the
temple, he had a private chapel for the ghost within the vast
enclosure of the royal residence; and here he often paid
his devotions to the august spirit, of whom he stood greatly
in awe. He took his wives with him to sing the departed
monarch's praise, and he constantly made offerings at the
shrine. Thither, too, would come the prophet to suck words
of wisdom from the venerable ghost and to impart them
to the king, who thus walked in the counsel of his glorified
father.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
p. 112. It may be worth while to
quote an early notice of the worship of
the Kings of Uganda. See C. T.
Wilson and R. W. Felkin, <hi rend='italic'>Uganda
and the Egyptian Soudan</hi> (London,
1882), i. 208: <q>The former kings of
the country appear also to be regarded
as demi-gods, and their graves are
kept with religious care, and houses are
erected over them, which are under
the constant supervision of one of the
principal chiefs of the country, and
where human sacrifices are also occasionally
offered.</q> The graves here spoken
of are no doubt the temples in which
the jawbones and navel-strings of the
dead kings are kept and worshipped.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The souls
of dead
kings
worshipped
in Kiziba.</note>
In Kiziba, a district of Central Africa on the western
side of Lake Victoria Nyanza, the souls of dead kings
become ruling spirits; temples are built in their honour and
priests appointed to serve them. The people are composed
of two different races, the Bairu, who are aboriginals, and
the Bahima, who are immigrants from the north. The
royal family belongs to the Bahima stock. In his lifetime
the king's person is sacred; and all his actions, property,
and so forth are described by special terms appropriated to
that purpose. The people are divided into totemic clans:
the totems (<foreign rend='italic'>muziro</foreign>) are mostly animals or parts of animals:
no man may kill or eat his totem animal, nor marry a
woman who has the same totem as himself. The royal
family seems to have serpents for their totem; after death
the king's soul lives in a serpent, while his body is buried in
the hut where he died. The people revere a supreme god
named Rugaba, who is believed to have created man and
cattle; but they know little about him, and though they
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
occasionally pray to him, particularly in the case of a
difficult birth, he has no priests and receives no sacrifices.
The business of the priests is to act as intermediaries, not
between God and man, but between men and the spirits.
The spirits are believed to have been formerly kings of the
world. The highest of them is a certain Wamara, who
rules over the souls of the dead, and who would seem to
have been a great king in his life. Temples are built for
him; they are like the houses of men, but only half as
large. A perpetual holy fire is kept up in each temple,
and the priest passes the night in it. He receives white
sheep or goats as victims, and generally acts also as a
diviner or physician. When a man is very ill, he thinks
that Wamara, the lord of the spirits of the dead, is summoning
him to the far country; so he sends a sacrifice to
Wamara's priest, who prays to the spirit to let the sick
man live yet a while.<note place='foot'>Hermann Rehse, <hi rend='italic'>Kiziba, Land
und Leute</hi> (Stuttgart, 1910), pp. 4-7,
106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 121, 125 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 130. Among
the totems of the people are the long-tailed
monkey (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cercopithecus</foreign>), a small
species of antelope, the locust, the
hippopotamus, the buffalo, the otter,
dappled cows, and the hearts of all
animals. The members of the clan
which is charged with the duty of
burying the king's body have for their
totem the remains of a goat that has
been killed by a leopard. See H.
Rehse, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This great spirit of an ancient
king, who now rules over the dead, resembles the Egyptian
Osiris.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship of
ancestral
spirits
among the
Bantu
tribes of
Northern
Rhodesia.</note>
The Bantu tribes who inhabit the great tableland of
Northern Rhodesia revere a supreme being whom they call
Leza, but their ideas about him are hazy. Thunder, lightning,
earthquakes, rain, and other natural phenomena are
grouped together under his name as manifestations of his
power. Among the more progressive tribes, such as the
Awemba and the Wabisa, the great god is thought to take
some interest in human affairs; and though they do not
pray to him, they nevertheless invoke him by his names of
praise, which set forth his attributes as the protector and
judge of mankind. It is he, too, who receives the souls of
the departed. <q>Yet, as far as the dominant Wemba tribe
is concerned, the cult of Leza is outside their ordinary
religion. There is no direct access to him by prayer or by
sacrifices, which are made to Mulenga and the other great
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
tribal and ancestral spirits instead. For upon such animism
is founded the whole fabric of Wemba religion.</q><note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
ancestral spirits whom the Awemba and all other tribes of
this region worship may be divided into two main classes.
First come the spirits of departed chiefs, who are publicly
worshipped by the whole tribe; and second come the
spirits of near relations who are worshipped privately
by each head of a family.<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia</hi>,
pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> <q>Among the Awemba there
is no special shrine for these purely family spirits, who are
worshipped inside the hut, and to whom family sacrifice of
a sheep, a goat, or a fowl is made, the spirit receiving the
blood spilt on the ground, while all the members of the
family partake of the flesh together. For a religious Wemba
man the cult of the spirit of his nearest relations (of his
grandparents, or of his deceased father, mother, elder brother,
or maternal uncle) is considered quite sufficient. Out of
these spirit relatives a man will worship one whom he
considers as his special familiar, for various reasons. For
instance, the diviner may have told him that his last illness
was caused because he had not respected the spirit of his
uncle; accordingly he will be careful in future to adopt his
uncle as his tutelary spirit. As a mark of such respect he
may devote a cow or a goat to one of the spirits of his
ancestors. Holding the fowl, for instance, in his hands, he
will dedicate it, asking the spirit to come and abide in it,
upon which the fowl is let go, and is afterwards called by the
name of the spirit. If the necessities, however, of the larder
demand that it should be killed, another animal is taken, and
the spirit is asked to accept it as a substitute! Before
beginning any special task, such as hoeing a new garden,
or going on a journey, Wemba men invoke their tutelary
spirits to be with them and to assist their efforts, in short
ejaculatory prayers usually couched in a set formula. Among
many of the tribes in the North Luangwa district longer
formal prayers are still made to all the deceased ancestors
of the clan at the time of harvest, asking them to protect
the crops and to drive away illnesses and evil spirits from
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
the family, which honours them with libations of beer and
offerings of the first-fruits.</q><note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship of
ancestral
spirits is
apparently
the main
practical
religion of
all the
Bantu
tribes.</note>
Thus among these tribes, who all belong to the great
Bantu family, the public worship which a whole tribe pays
to the souls of its dead chiefs is probably nothing but an
extension of the private worship which every family pays
privately to the souls of its dead members. And just as
the members of his family whom a man worships privately
are not mythical beings conjured up by imagination out of
a distant past, but were once real men like himself whom he
knew in life, it may be his father, or uncle, or elder brother,
so we may be sure that in like manner the dead chiefs
revered by the whole tribe are not creations of the mythical
fancy, but were once real men of flesh and blood, who ruled
over the tribe, and whose memory has been more or less
faithfully preserved by tradition. In this respect the tribes
of Northern Rhodesia are typical of all the tribes of that
great Bantu family which occupies nearly the whole southern
half of Africa, from the great equatorial lakes to the Cape
of Good Hope. The main practical religion of all these
numerous and widespread peoples appears to be the worship
of their ancestors.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship of
ancestral
spirits
among the
Bantu
tribes of
South
Africa.</note>
To adduce in full the evidence which points to this
conclusion would lead us too far from our present subject;
it must suffice to cite a few typical statements of
competent authorities which refer to different tribes of the
Bantu stock. Speaking with special reference to the tribes of
South-Eastern Africa, the Rev. James Macdonald tells us
that <q>the religion of the Bantu, which they not only profess
but really regulate their conduct by, is based on the belief
that the spirits of their ancestors interfere constantly in their
affairs. Every man worships his own ancestors and offers
sacrifices to avert their wrath. The clan worships the spirits
of the ancestors of its chiefs, and the tribe worships the
spirits of the ancestors of the paramount chief.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. James Macdonald, <q>Manners,
Customs, Superstitions, and Religions
of South African Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Institute</hi>, xix. (1890)
p. 286. Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Light in Africa</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1890), p. 191.</note> <q>The
religion of the Bantu was based upon the supposition of the
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
existence of spirits that could interfere with the affairs of
this world. These spirits were those of their ancestors and
their deceased chiefs, the greatest of whom had control over
lightning. When the spirits became offended or hungry
they sent a plague or disaster until sacrifices were offered
and their wrath or hunger was appeased. The head of a
family of commoners on such an occasion killed an animal,
and all ate of the meat, as the hungry ghost was supposed
to be satisfied with the smell.</q><note place='foot'>G. McCall Theal, <hi rend='italic'>Records of
South-Eastern Africa</hi>, vii. (1901) pp.
399 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> With regard to the ghost who
controls lightning see Mr. Warner's
notes in Col. Maclean's <hi rend='italic'>Compendium
of Kafir Laws and Customs</hi> (Cape
Town, 1866), pp. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>The
Kafirs have strange notions respecting
the lightning. They consider that it
is governed by the <foreign rend='italic'>umshologu</foreign>, or ghost,
of the greatest and most renowned of
their departed chiefs; and who is
emphatically styled the <foreign rend='italic'>inkosi</foreign>; but
they are not at all clear as to which
of their ancestors is intended by this
designation. Hence they allow of no
lamentation being made for a person
killed by lightning; as they say that it
would be a sign of disloyalty to lament
for one whom the <foreign rend='italic'>inkosi</foreign> had sent for,
and whose services he consequently
needed; and it would cause him to
punish them, by making the lightning
again to descend and do them another
injury.</q></note> For example, in the year
1891 the son of a chief of the Pondomisi tribe was arrested
for an assault and sent for trial before a colonial court. It
chanced to be a season of intense heat and severe drought,
and the Pondomisi tribe attributed these calamities to the
wrath of a dead chief named Gwanya, very famous in his
lifetime, whose body, fastened to a log, had been buried
under a heap of stones in a deep pool of the Lina river.
This redoubtable chieftain was the seventh ancestor in the
direct line of the man who had committed the assault; and
he warmly resented the indignity which the whites had done
to a noble scion of his house by consigning him to durance
vile. To appease the natural indignation of the ghost, the
tribesmen killed cattle on the banks of the pool which
contained his grave, and threw the flesh into the water
along with new dishes full of beer. The prisoner, however,
was convicted of the assault and sentenced by the ruthless
magistrate, who was no respecter of ghosts, to pay a fine.
But the tribe clubbed together and paid the fine for him;
and a few days later rain fell in plenty. The mollified ghost
had opened the celestial sluices.<note place='foot'>G. McCall Theal, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> vii. 400.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
to the dead
among
the Bantu
tribes of
South
Africa.</note>
Another writer, describing the religion of the South
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
African Bantus, tells us that <q>the ancestral spirits love the
very things they loved before they passed through the flesh;
they cherish the same desires and have the same antipathies.
The living cannot add to the number of the wives of ancestral
spirits; but they can kill cattle in their honour and keep
their praise and memory alive on earth. Above all things,
they can give them beef and beer. And if the living do
not give them sufficient of these things the spirits are supposed
to give the people a bad time: they send drought, and sickness,
and famine, until people kill cattle in their honour.
When men are alive they love to be praised and flattered,
fed and attended to; after death they want the very same
things, for death does not change personality.... In
time of drought, or sickness, or great trouble, there would
be great searchings of heart as to which ancestor had been
neglected, for the trouble would be supposed to be caused
by the neglected ancestor. Most of the people would get
the subject on their nerves (at least, as far as a Kafir could
get anything on the leather strings which do duty for nerves),
and some one would be sure to have a vivid dream in which
an ancestor would complain that the people had not praised
him half enough of late. So an ox would be killed, either
by the head-man of the kraal or by a diviner. Then the
man would say over the ox as it was being killed, <q>Cry out,
ox of So-and-So; listen to us, So-and-So; this is your ox;
we praise you by all your laud-giving names, and tell of all
your deeds; do not be angry with us any more; do you not
see that this is your ox? Do not accuse us of neglecting
you; when, forsooth, have we ceased to praise you and offer
you meat and beer? Take note, then, that here is another
ox we are offering to you.</q> When the ox is dead some of
the meat is mixed with herbs and medicines and placed in
a hut with a bowlful of blood. This meat is placed in the
part of the hut where the man loved to sit while he was
alive, and some one is told off to guard the sacrifice. The
meat is left for a night, or longer, and the spirits are
supposed to come and enjoy the smell, or drink the serum
which oozes from the meat, and to inhale the smell of the
beer. The priest or diviner will then sprinkle the people
and the huts with medicine made from the contents of the
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
stomach of the ox. He places a little on a sherd; when
this is dry he burns it and calls on the spirits to smell the
incense. After the meat has been left for a certain time it
is taken out and cooked, and eaten by the men near the
cattle kraal in public.... If the trouble does not vanish
after this ceremony the people get angry and say to the
spirits, <q>When have we ceased to kill cattle for you, and
when have we ever refused to praise you by your praise-names?
Why, then, do you treat us so shabbily? If you
do not behave better we shall utterly forget your names, and
then what will you do when there is no one to praise you?
You will have to go and live on grasshoppers. If you do
not mend your ways we shall forget you. What use is it
that we kill oxen for you and praise you? You do not give
us rain or crops, or cause our cattle to bear well; you show
no gratitude in return for all we do for you. We shall
utterly disown you. We shall tell the people that, as for us,
we have no ancestral spirits, and this will be to your shame.
We are disgusted with you.</q></q><note place='foot'>Dudley Kidd, <hi rend='italic'>The Essential Kafir</hi> (London, 1904), pp. 88-91.</note> Thus the sweet savour of
beef and beer does not suffice to content Caffre ghosts;
they share the love of praise and flattery with many gods
of higher rank.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Worship
of the dead
among the
Basutos.</note>
Among the Basutos, an important Bantu people of
South Africa, <q>each family is supposed to be under the
direct influence and protection of its ancestors; but the
tribe, taken as a whole, acknowledges for its national gods
the ancestors of the reigning sovereign. Thus, the Basutos
address their prayers to Monaheng and Motlumi, from
whom their chiefs are descended. The Baharutsis and the
Barolongs invoke Tobege and his wife Mampa. Mampa
makes known the will of her husband, announcing each of
her revelations by these words, <q><foreign rend='italic'>O re! O re!</foreign></q> <q>He has
said! he has said!</q> They make a distinction between the
ancient and modern divinities. The latter are considered
inferior in power, but more accessible; hence this formula,
which is often used: <q>New gods! entreat the ancient gods
for us!</q> In all countries spirits are more the objects of
fear than of love. A deep feeling of terror generally accompanies
the idea that the dead dispose of the lot of the living.
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
The ancients spoke much of incensed shades. If they
sacrificed to the manes, it was generally in order to appease
them. These ideas perfectly correspond to those of the
Basutos. They conjure rather than pray; although they
seek to gain favours, they think more of averting chastisement.
Their predominating idea as to their ancestors is,
that they are continually endeavouring to draw them to
themselves. Every disease is attributed to them; thus
medicine among these people is almost entirely a religious
affair. The first thing is to discover, by means of the <foreign rend='italic'>litaola</foreign>
(divining bones), under the influence of what <foreign rend='italic'>molimo</foreign> the
patient is supposed to be. Is it an ancestor on the father's
side or the mother's? According as fate decides, the
paternal or maternal uncle will offer the purifying sacrifice,
but rarely the father or brother. This sacrifice alone can
render efficacious the medicines prescribed by the <foreign rend='italic'>ngaka</foreign>
(doctor).... As soon as a person is dead he takes his
place among the family gods. His remains are deposited
in the cattle-pen. An ox is immolated over his grave:
this is the first oblation made to the new divinity, and at
the same time an act of intercession in his favour, serving
to ensure his happy reception in the subterranean regions.
All those present aid in sprinkling the grave, and repeat the
following prayer: <q>Repose in peace with the gods; give us
tranquil nights.</q></q><note place='foot'>Rev. E. Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>
(London, 1861), pp. 248-250.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Worship
of the dead
among the
Thonga.</note>
Similarly among the Thonga, another Bantu tribe of
South Africa, <q>any man, who has departed this earthly life,
becomes a <foreign rend='italic'>shikwembu</foreign>, a god</q>;<note place='foot'>Henri A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>The Life of a
South African Tribe</hi> (Neuchâtel, 1912-1913),
ii. 347.</note> <q>when an old decrepit
man or woman dies, he at once becomes a god: he has
entered the domain of infinity.</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 385.</note> In this tribe <q>the spirits
of the ancestors are the main objects of religious worship.
They form the principal category of spirits.</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 344.</note> <q>On the
one hand, the ancestor-gods are truly gods, endowed with
the attributes of divinity; whilst, on the other, they seem
to be nothing but mere human beings, exactly on the same
level as their worshippers.</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 385.</note> There are two great classes
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
of these ancestor-gods, to wit, <q>those of the family, and
those of the country, the latter being those of the reigning
family. They do not differ as regards their nature. In
national calamities those of the country are invoked, whilst,
for purely family matters, those of the family are called
upon. Moreover, each family has two sets of gods, those
on the father's side and those on the mother's, those of
<foreign rend='italic'>kweru</foreign> and those of <foreign rend='italic'>bakokwana</foreign>. They are equal in dignity.
Both can be invoked, and the divinatory bones are always
asked to which the offering must be made. It seems,
however, as if the gods on the mother's side were more
tender-hearted and more popular than those on the father's.
The reason for this is, perhaps, that relations are easier with
the family of the mother than with that of the father. It is
also just possible that it is a relic of the matriarchal period,
when the ancestors of the mother only were known, and
consequently invoked. At any rate, the part played by
<foreign rend='italic'>batukulu</foreign> [uterine] nephews in the offerings shows that they
are the true representatives of the gods, not of those of their
father, but of their mother.</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 348
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Among the Thonga <q>the
belief in the continuation of life after death is universal,
being at the base of the ancestrolatry, which is the religion
of the tribe.</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 341.</note> <q>How real is the ancestrolatry, the religion
of the Thonga, of, in fact, all the South African Bantus!
How frequent and manifold are its manifestations! This is
the first, and the most perceptible set of their religious
intuitions, and any European, who has stayed in their
villages, learnt their language, and tried to understand their
customs, has had the opportunity of familiarizing himself
with this religion.</q><note place='foot'>H. A. Junod, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 346.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
to dead
chiefs
among the
Basutos
and
Bechuanas.</note>
Among the Basutos and Bechuanas, who also belong to
the great Bantu family, the sacrificial ritual is not highly
developed. <q>Only in great misfortunes which affect the
whole people or the royal family, a black ox is slaughtered;
for in such cases they always think that the angry spirits
of the departed are the cause of all the suffering. <q><foreign rend='italic'>Re
amogioa ki badimo</foreign>,</q> say the people, <q>the spirits are robbing
us.</q> The ox is led to the chiefs grave; there they
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
pray, <q>Lord, we are come to call upon thee, we who are
thy children; make not our hearts troubled; take not,
Lord, that which is ours.</q> The old chief is honoured and
praised in songs, he is invoked by all his praise-names, the
ox is killed and its flesh eaten, but the blood and the
contents of the stomach are poured on the grave, and there
the bones of the sacrificed animal are also deposited.</q><note place='foot'>A. Merensky, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur Kenntnis
Süd-Afrikas</hi> (Berlin, 1875), p. 130.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Worship
of the dead
among the
Zulus.</note>
The Zulus, another great Bantu tribe of South Africa,
believe in the existence of a being whom they call Unkulunkulu,
which means <q>the Old-Old-one, the most ancient
man.</q> They say that <q>it is he who was the first man; he
broke off in the beginning. We do not know his wife; and
the ancients do not tell us that he had a wife.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. H. Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of the Amazulu</hi>, i. (Natal,
Springvale, etc., 1868) pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This
Old-Old-one or Great-Great-one <q>is represented as having
made all things&mdash;men, cattle, water, fire, the mountains,
and whatever else is seen. He is also said to have appointed
their names. Creation was effected by splitting a reed, when
the first man and other things issued from the cleft.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Joseph Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs
of Natal and the Zulu Country</hi> (London,
1857), p. 159.</note>
Further, the Zulus and other Caffre tribes of Natal <q>believe
that, when a person dies, his <foreign rend='italic'>i-hloze</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>isi-tute</foreign> survives.
These words are translated <q>spirit,</q> and there seems no
objection to the rendering. They refer to something manifestly
distinguished from the body, and the nature of which
the prophets endeavour to explain by saying that it is
identical with the shadow. The residence of the <foreign rend='italic'>ama-hloze</foreign>,
or spirits, seems to be beneath; the practice of breaking a
man's assagais, before they are buried with him, shows that
he is believed to return to earth through the grave; while it
appears to be generally thought that, if the earth were
removed from the grave, the ghost would return and frighten
his descendants. When spirits have entered the future state,
they are believed to possess great power; prosperity is
ascribed to their favour, and misfortune to their anger; they
are elevated in fact to the rank of deities, and (except where
the Great-Great is worshipped concurrently with them) they
are the only objects of a Kafir's adoration. Their attention
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
(or providence) is limited to their own relatives&mdash;a father
caring for the family, and a chief for the tribe, which they
respectively left behind them. They are believed to occupy
the same relative position as they did in the body, the departed
spirit of a chief being sometimes invoked to compel a man's
ancestors to bless him.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 161.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sacrifices
and prayers
to the dead
among the
Zulus.</note>
<q>To these shades of the dead, especially to the ghosts of
their great men, as Jama, Senzangakona, and Chaka, their
former kings, they look for help, and offer sacrifices; that is,
slaughter cattle to them, and offer a sort of prayer, in time
of danger and distress.... When they are sick, they
slaughter cattle to the shades, and say, <q>Father, look on me,
that this disease may cease from me. Let me have health
on the earth, and live a long time.</q> They carry the meat
into the house, and shut it up there, saying, <q>Let the paternal
shades eat, so shall they know that the offering was made
for them, and grant us great wealth, so that both we and our
children may prosper.</q> In the cattle-fold they talk a long
time, praising the ghosts; they take the contents of the
stomach, and strew it upon all the fold. Again they take
it, and strew it within the houses, saying, <q>Hail, friend! Thou
of such a place, grant us a blessing, beholding what we have
done. You see this distress; may you remove it, since we
have given you our animal. We know not what more you
want, whether you still require anything more or not.</q> They
say, <q>May you grant us grain, that it may be abundant, that
we may eat, of course, and not be in need of anything, since
now we have given you what you want.</q> They say, <q>Yes,
for a long time have you preserved me in all my going.
Behold, you see, I have just come to have a kraal. This
kraal was built by yourself, father; and now why do you
consent to diminish your own kraal? Build on us as you
have begun, let it be large, that your offspring, still here
above, may increase, increasing in knowledge of you, whence
cometh great power.</q> Sometimes they make beer for the
ghosts, and leave a little in the pot, saying, <q>It will be eaten
by the ghosts that they may grant an abundant harvest
again, that we may not have a famine.</q> If one is on the
point of being injured by anything, he says, <q>I was preserved
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
by our divinity, which was still watching over me.</q>
Perhaps he slaughters a goat in honour of the same, and
puts the gall on his head; and when the goat cries out for
pain of being killed, he says, <q>Yes, then, there is your animal,
let it cry, that ye may hear, ye our gods who have preserved
me; I myself am desirous of living on thus a long time here
on the earth; why then do you call me to account, since I
think I am all right in respect to you? And while I live, I
put my trust in you, our paternal and maternal gods.</q></q><note place='foot'>Rev. Lewis Grout, <hi rend='italic'>Zulu-land, or
Life among the Zulu-Kafirs</hi> (Philadelphia,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), pp. 137, 143-145.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>A native
Zulu
account
of the
worship of
the dead.</note>
<q>Black people,</q> say the Zulus, <q>do not worship all
Amatongo indifferently, that is, all the dead of their tribe.
Speaking generally, the head of each house is worshipped
by the children of that house; for they do not know the
ancients who are dead, nor their laud-giving names, nor their
names. But their father whom they knew is the head by
whom they begin and end in their prayer, for they know
him best, and his love for his children; they remember his
kindness to them whilst he was living; they compare his
treatment of them whilst he was living, support themselves
by it, and say, <q>He will still treat us in the same way now
he is dead. We do not know why he should regard others
besides us; he will regard us only.</q> So it is then although
they worship the many Amatongo of their tribe, making a
great fence around them for their protection; yet their father
is far before all others when they worship the Amatongo.
Their father is a great treasure to them even when he is
dead. And those of his children who are already grown up
know him thoroughly, his gentleness, and his bravery. And
if there is illness in the village, the eldest son lauds him
with the laud-giving names which he gained when fighting
with the enemy, and at the same time lauds all the other
Amatongo; the son reproves the father, saying, <q>We for our
parts may just die. Who are you looking after? Let us
die all of us, that we may see into whose house you will
enter.<note place='foot'><q>That is, they suggest to the
Itongo [ancestral spirit, singular of
Amatongo], by whose ill-will or want
of care they are afflicted, that if they
should all die in consequence, and thus
his worshippers come to an end, he
would have none to worship him; and
therefore for his own sake, as well as
for theirs, he had better preserve his
people, that there may be a village for
him to enter, and meat of the sacrifices
for him to eat.</q></note> You will eat grasshoppers; you will no longer be
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
invited to go anywhere, if you destroy your own village.</q>
After that, because they have worshipped him, they take
courage saying, <q>He has heard; he will come and treat our
diseases, and they will cease.</q> Such then is the faith which
children have in the Itongo [ancestral spirit] which is their
father. And if there is a chief wife of a village, who has
given birth to children, and if her husband is not dead, her
Itongo is much reverenced by her husband and all the
children. And that chief wife becomes an Itongo which
takes great care of the village. But it is the father especially
that is the head of the village.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. Henry Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>The Religious
System of the Amazulu</hi>, Part ii.,
<hi rend='italic'>Amatongo or Ancestor Worship as existing
among the Amazulu, in their own
words, with a translation into English</hi>
(Natal, Springvale, etc., 1869), pp.
144-146.</note> Thus among the Zulus
it is the spirits of those who have just died, especially the
spirits of fathers and mothers, who are most revered and
worshipped. The spirits of the more remote dead are forgotten.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship
of the dead
among the
Herero
of German
South-West
Africa. Ancestral
spirits
(<foreign rend='italic'>Ovakuru</foreign>)
worshipped
by the
Herero.</note>
When the missionaries inquired into the religious ideas
of the Herero, a Bantu tribe of German South-West Africa,
they heard much of a certain Mukuru, whom at first they
took to be the great god of heaven and earth. Accordingly
they adopted Mukuru as the native name for the
Christian God, and set out on their mission to preach the
glad tidings of Mukuru and his divine Son to the poor
benighted heathen. But their first experiences were disconcerting.
Again and again when they arrived in
a village and announced their intention to the chief, they
were brought up very short by that great man, who told
them with an air of astonishment that he himself was
Mukuru. For example, Messrs. Büttner and Irle paid a visit
to an old chief named Tjenda and remonstrated with him on
the impropriety of which he had been guilty in giving a
baptized girl in marriage to a native gentleman whose
domestic arrangements were framed on the polygamous
patriarchal pattern. <q>Mukuru will punish you for that,</q>
said Mr. Büttner. <q>What?</q> roared the chief. <q>Who's
Mukuru? Why, I am Mukuru in my own tribe,</q> and he
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
bundled the two missionaries out of the village. A repetition
of these painful incidents at last impressed on the minds of
the missionaries the conviction that Mukuru was not God at
all but merely the head of a family, an ancestor, whether
alive or dead.<note place='foot'>Missionar J. Irle, <hi rend='italic'>Die Herero, ein
Beitrag zur Landes- Volks- und Missionskunde</hi>
(Gütersloh, 1906), pp. 72
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> They ascertained at the same time that the
Herero recognize a good god who dwells in heaven and
bears the name of Ndjambi Karunga. But they do not
worship him nor bring him offerings, because he is so kind
that he hurts nobody, and therefore they need not fear him.
<q>Rather they share the opinion of the other Bantu tribes
that Ndjambi, the good Creator, has withdrawn to heaven
and left the government on earth to the demons.</q><note place='foot'>J. Irle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 73.</note> <q>It is
true that the Herero are acquainted with punishment for
what is bad. But that punishment they ascribe to Mukuru
or their ancestors. It is their ancestors (<foreign rend='italic'>Ovakuru</foreign><note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Ovakuru</foreign>, the plural form of
<foreign rend='italic'>Mukuru</foreign>.</note>) whom
they must fear; it is they who are angry and can bring
danger and misfortune on a man. So it is intelligible that
the whole of their worship turns, not on Ndjambi Karunga,
but on their ancestors. It is in order to win and keep their
favour, to avert their displeasure and wrath, in short to
propitiate them, that the Herero bring their many offerings;
they do so not out of gratitude, but out of fear, not out of
love, but out of terror. Their religion is a worship of
ancestors with here and there touches of fetishism.</q><note place='foot'>J. Irle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 74.</note> <q>Thus
among the Herero, as among all Bantu tribes, there exists a
religious dualism: they know the highest, the true God, but
they worship their ancestors.</q><note place='foot'>J. Irle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 75. The writer
tells us (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>) that the Herero name for
the good celestial God, whom they
acknowledge but do not worship, is
common, in different forms, to almost
all the Bantu tribes. Among the
Ovambo it is Kalunga; among tribes
of Loango, the Congo, Angola and
Benguela it is Zambi, Njambi, Ambi,
Njame, Onjame, Ngambe, Nsambi;
in the Cameroons it is Nzambi, etc.
Compare John H. Weeks, <hi rend='italic'>Among
Congo Cannibals</hi> (London, 1913), pp.
246 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>We have found a vague
knowledge of a Supreme Being, and
a belief in Him, very general among
those tribes on the Congo with which
we have come into contact.... On
the Lower Congo He is called <foreign rend='italic'>Nzambi</foreign>,
or by His fuller title <foreign rend='italic'>Nzambi a mpungu</foreign>;
no satisfactory root word has yet been
found for <foreign rend='italic'>Nzambi</foreign>, but for <foreign rend='italic'>mpungu</foreign>
there are sayings and proverbs that
clearly indicate its meaning as, most
of all, supreme, highest, and <foreign rend='italic'>Nzambi
a mpungu</foreign> as the Being most High,
or Supreme. On the Upper Congo
among the Bobangi folk the word used
for the Supreme Being is <foreign rend='italic'>Nyambe</foreign>;
among the Lulanga people, <foreign rend='italic'>Nzakomba</foreign>;
among the Boloki, <foreign rend='italic'>Njambe</foreign>; among
the Bopoto people it is <foreign rend='italic'>Libanza</foreign>....
It is interesting to note that the most
common name for the Supreme Being
on the Congo is also known, in one
form or another, over an extensive
area of Africa reaching from 6° north
of the Equator away to extreme South
Africa; as, for example, among the
Ashanti it is <foreign rend='italic'>Onyame</foreign>, at Gaboon it
is <foreign rend='italic'>Anyambie</foreign>, and two thousand miles
away among the Barotse folk it is
<foreign rend='italic'>Niambe</foreign>. These are the names that
stand for a Being who is endowed
with strength, wealth, and wisdom by
the natives; and He is also regarded
and spoken of by them as the principal
Creator of the world, and the Maker
of all things.... But the Supreme
Being is believed by the natives to have
withdrawn Himself to a great distance
after performing His creative works;
that He has now little or no concern
in mundane affairs; and apparently
no power over spirits and no control
over the lives of men, either to protect
them from malignant spirits or to
help them by averting danger. They
also consider the Supreme Being
(<foreign rend='italic'>Nzambi</foreign>) as being so good and kind
that there is no need to appease
Him by rites, ceremonies or sacrifices.
Hence they never pray to this
Supreme One, they never worship Him,
or think of Him as being interested
in the doings of the world and its
peoples.</q></note> And among the worshipful
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
ancestors <q>the old dead chiefs of every tribe take the first
place. The son of a great dead chief and the whole tribe
worship that old father as their god. But the remote
ancestors of that chief they do not worship, indeed they
hardly know them by name and can no longer point to their
graves.</q><note place='foot'>J. Irle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 77. Mr. Irle's
account of the religion of the Herero
or Ovaherero is fully borne out by
the testimony of earlier missionaries
among the tribe. See Rev. G.
Viehe, <q>Some Customs of the Ovaherero</q>
<hi rend='italic'>(South African) Folk-lore
Journal</hi>, i. (Cape Town, 1879) pp.
64 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>: <q>The religious customs and
ceremonies of the Ovaherero are all
rooted in the presumption that the
deceased continue to live, and that
they have a great influence on earth,
and exercise power over the life and
death of man. This influence and
power is ascribed especially to those
who have been great men, and who
become <foreign rend='italic'>Ovakuru</foreign> after death. The
numerous religious customs and ceremonies
are a worshipping of the
ancestors.</q> Further, Mr. Viehe reports
that <q>the Ovaherero have a
slight idea of another being (Supreme
being?) which differs greatly from the
<foreign rend='italic'>Ovakuru</foreign>, is superior to them, and is
supposed never to have been a human
being. It is called <foreign rend='italic'>Karunga</foreign>....
<foreign rend='italic'>Karunga</foreign> does only good; whilst the
influence of the <foreign rend='italic'>Ovakuru</foreign> is more
feared than wished for; and, therefore,
it is not thought necessary to
bring sacrifices to <foreign rend='italic'>Karunga</foreign> to guard
against his influence.</q> He is situated
so high, and is so superior to men <q>that
he takes little special notice of them;
and so the Ovaherero, on their part,
also trouble themselves little about
this superior being</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 67
note 1). Similar evidence is given
by another missionary as to the belief
of the Herero in a superior god
Karunga and their fear and worship
of ancestral spirits. See the Rev. H.
Beiderbecke, <q>Some Religious Ideas
and Customs of the Ovaherero</q> <hi rend='italic'>(South
African) Folk-lore Journal</hi>, ii. (Cape
Town, 1880) pp. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus with the Herero, as with the Zulus, it is
the recent and well-remembered dead who are chiefly or
exclusively worshipped; as the souls of the departed recede
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
further and further into the past their memory perishes, and
the nimbus of supernatural glory which encircled it for a time
fades gradually away.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship
of the dead
among the
Ovambo.</note>
The religion of the Ovambo, another Bantu tribe of
German South-West Africa, is similar. They also recognize
a great being named Kalunga, who created the world and
man, but they neither fear nor worship him. A far greater
part is played in the religion of the Ovambo by their belief
in spirits, and amongst the worshipful spirits a conspicuous
place is assigned to the souls of the dead. Every man
leaves behind him at death a spirit, which continues to exist
on earth and can influence the living; for example, it may
enter into their bodies and thereby cause all sorts of sickness.
However, the souls of ordinary dead men can exert
their influence only on members of their own families; the
souls of dead chiefs, on the other hand, have power over the
rain, which they can either give or withhold. To these
powerful spirits a portion of the new corn is offered at
harvest as a thank-offering for their forbearance in not
visiting the people with sickness, and above all for their
bounty in sending down the fertilizing showers on the crops.
The souls of dead magicians are particularly dreaded; and
to prevent the multiplication of these dangerous spirits it
is customary to dismember their bodies, severing the arms
and legs from the trunk and cutting the tongue out of
the mouth. If these precautions are taken immediately
after death, the soul of the dead man cannot become
a dangerous ghost; the mutilation of his body has practically
disarmed his spirit.<note place='foot'>Hermann Tönjes, <hi rend='italic'>Ovamboland, Land, Leute, Mission</hi> (Berlin, 1911), pp.
193-197.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship of
the dead
among the
Wahehe of
German
East
Africa.</note>
The Wahehe, a Bantu tribe of German East Africa,
believe in a great invisible spirit named Nguruhi, who created
the world and rules both human destiny and the elements.
He it is who makes the rain to fall, the sun to shine,
the wind to blow, the thunder to roll, and the crops to
grow. <q>This god is accordingly conceived as all-powerful,
yet with the limitation that he only exercises a general
power of direction over the world, especially human fate,
while the <foreign rend='italic'>masoka</foreign>, the spirits of the dead, wield a permanent
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
and very considerable influence on the course of
particular events. Nguruhi is lord also of all the spirits
of the dead (<foreign rend='italic'>masoka</foreign>), but his relation to them has not
been further thought out. With this Supreme Being the
people hold no intercourse by means of prayer, sacrifice,
or in any other way. He stands remote from the religious
life of the Wahehe and really serves only as an explanation
of all those things and events which are otherwise
inexplicable. All religious intercourse, all worship centres
alone on the spirits of the dead. Hence if we speak of a
religion of the Wahehe, it must be described as a pure
worship of ancestors.</q><note place='foot'>E. Nigmann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wahehe</hi> (Berlin,
1908), pp. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer does
not describe the Wahehe as a Bantu
tribe, but from the characteristic prefixes
which they employ to designate
the tribe, individual tribesmen, the
country, and so forth (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 124)
we may infer that the people belong to
the Bantu stock.</note> The human soul quits the body at
death and at once becomes an ancestral spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>m'soka</foreign>),
invisible and endowed with complete liberty of motion.
Even the youngest children have souls which rank among
the ancestral spirits at death. Hence the great multitude of
the dead comprises spirits of all ages, from the infant one
day old to the grey-haired patriarch. They are good or bad
according as they were good or bad in life, and their social
position also is unchanged. He who was powerful in life is
powerful also in death; he who was a nobody among men
is a nobody also among the spirits. Hence the ghost of a
great man can do more for the living than the ghost of a
common man; and the ghost of a man can do more than
the ghost of a woman. Yet even the meanest ghost has power
over the greatest living man, who can only defend himself
by appealing for help to stronger ancestral spirits. Thus
while the Supreme Being exercises a general superintendence
over affairs, the real administration is in the hands of the
ancestral spirits. While he, for example, regulates the
weather as a whole, it is the ghosts who cause each particular
shower to fall or the sun to break out in glory from
the clouds. If he sends plagues on the whole people or
stays the ravages of disease, it is the ghosts who make each
individual sick or sound. These powerful spirits exert
themselves especially to help their descendants, though they
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
do not hesitate to plague their own kith and kin if they think
themselves neglected. They flit freely through the air and
perch on trees, mountains, and so forth, but they lodge by
preference at their graves, and you are always sure of finding
them there, if you wish to consult them.<note place='foot'>E. Nigmann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wahehe</hi>, pp. 23
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> That is why in
the country of the Wahehe the only places of sacrifice are
the graves; temples and altars are unknown.<note place='foot'>E. Nigmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 35.</note> However, it is
only the bodies of considerable persons that are buried; the
corpses of common folk are simply thrown away in the
bush;<note place='foot'>E. Nigmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 39.</note> so that the number of graves and consequently of
sacrificial places is strictly limited. The spirits of the dead
appear to the living most commonly in dreams to give
them information or warning, but oftener to chide and
torment them. So the sleeper wakes in a fright and consults
a diviner, who directs him what he must do in order to
appease the angry ghost. Following the directions of his
spiritual adviser the man sacrifices an ox, or it may be only
a sheep or a fowl, at the tomb of one of his ancestors, prays
to the ghost, and having scattered a few morsels of the
victim's flesh on the grave, and spat a mouthful of beer upon
it, retires with his family to feast on the remainder of the
carcase. Such sacrifices to the dead are offered on occasion
of sickness, the lack of male heirs, a threatened war, an
intended journey, in short, before any important undertaking
of which the issue is doubtful; and, they are accompanied
by prayers for health, victory, good harvests, and so forth.<note place='foot'>E. Nigmann, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship
of the dead
among the
Bahima
of Ankole,
in Central
Africa.</note>
Once more, the Bahima, a Bantu people of Ankole, in
Central Africa, believe in a supreme god Lugaba, who
dwells in the sky and created man and beast; but <q>this
supreme being is not worshipped nor are offerings made to
him; he has no sacred place. Although they talk freely about
him, and acknowledge him to be their great benefactor,
they accept all his gifts as a matter of course, and make him
no offering in return.... One must not, therefore, conclude
that the Bahima are an irreligious people; like most of
the Bantu tribes their religion consists chiefly in dealing with
ghosts of departed relatives, and in standing well with them;
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
from the king to the humblest peasant the ghosts call for
daily consideration and constant offerings, whilst the deities
are only sought in case of great trials or national calamities.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>The Bahima, a
Cow Tribe of Enkole,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>, xxxvii.
(1907) pp. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The supreme
god Lugaba is no doubt the same with
the supreme god Rugaba worshipped
by the Bahimas in Kiziba. See
above, p. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>. With regard to the
religion of the Baganda the same
authority tells us that <q>the last, and
possibly the most venerated, class of
religious objects were the ghosts of
departed relatives. The power of
ghosts for good or evil was incalculable</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>, p. 273).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship of
dead chiefs
or kings
among the
Bantu
tribes of
Northern
Rhodesia.</note>
To return, now, to the worship of dead chiefs or kings
among the Bantu tribes of Northern Rhodesia. The spirits
of dead chiefs had priestesses to wait upon them, who were
called the <q>wives of the departed.</q> These were elderly
women who led a celibate life and swept the huts dedicated
to the ghosts of the chiefs. The aid of these dead
potentates was invoked in time of war and in seasons of
drought, and special offerings were brought to their shrines
at harvest.<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Plateau of Northern Rhodesia</hi>,
p. 83.</note> Among the Awemba, who form the aristocracy
of the country,<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 11.</note> when a diviner announced that a
drought was caused by the spirits of dead chiefs or kings
buried at Mwaruli, a bull would be sent to be sacrificed
to the souls of the deceased rulers; or if the drought
was severe, a human victim would be despatched, and the
high priest would keep him caged in a stoutly woven
fish-basket, until the preparations for the sacrifice were
complete.<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 292.</note> Among the Yombe no one might eat of the
first-fruits of the crops until the living chief had sacrificed
a bull before the tomb of his grandfather, and had deposited
pots of fresh beer and porridge, made from the first-fruits,
in front of the shrine. The ground about the tomb was
then carefully weeded, and the blood of the sacrificial victim
sprinkled on the freshly turned up soil and on the rafters
of the little hut. After thanking the ghost of his grandfather
for the harvest, and begging him to partake of the first-fruits,
the chief and his train withdrew to feast on the
carcase and the fresh porridge and beer at the village.<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
When the head chief or king of the Awemba had resolved
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
to make war on a distant enemy, he and the older men
of the tribe would pray daily for victory to the spirits of
the dead kings, his predecessors. The day before the army
was to set forth, the great war-drum boomed out and the
warriors flocked together from the outlying districts under
their respective captains. In the dusk of the evening the
king and the elderly women, who passed for the wives of
the dead kings and tended their shrines at the capital,
went and prayed at these shrines that the souls of the
departed monarchs would keep the war-path free from foes
and lead the king in a straight course to the enemy's
stockade. These solemn prayers the king led in person,
and the women beat their bare breasts as they joined in
the earnest appeal. Next morning the whole army was
marshalled in front of the ghost-huts of the dead kings:
the living king danced a war-dance before his ancestors,
while his chief wife sprinkled him with holy flour; and
all prostrated themselves in supplication before the shrines.<note place='foot'>J. H. West Sheane, <q>Wemba
Warpaths,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the African
Society</hi>, No. xli. (October, 1911) pp.
25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Among
these tribes
the spirits
of dead
chiefs or
kings are
thought
sometimes
to take
bodily
possession
of men and
women
or to be
incarnate
in animals.</note>
Among these tribes of Northern Rhodesia the spirits
of dead chiefs or kings sometimes take possession of the
bodies of live men or women and prophesy through their
mouths. When the spirit of a dead chief comes over a
man, he begins to roar like a lion, whereupon the women
gather together and beat the drums, shouting that the chief
has come to visit the village. The man thus temporarily
inspired will prophesy of future wars or impending attacks
by lions. While the inspiration lasts, he may eat nothing
cooked by fire, but only unfermented dough. However,
the spirit of a departed chief takes possession of women
oftener than of men. <q>These women assert that they are
possessed by the soul of some dead chief, and when they
feel the divine afflatus, whiten their faces to attract attention,
and anoint themselves with flour, which has a religious
and sanctifying potency. One of their number beats a
drum, and the others dance, singing at the same time
a weird song, with curious intervals. Finally, when they
have arrived at the requisite pitch of religious exaltation,
the possessed woman falls to the ground, and bursts forth
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
into a low and almost inarticulate chant, which has a most
uncanny effect. All are silent at once, and the <foreign rend='italic'>bashing'anga</foreign>
(medicine-men) gather round to interpret the voice of the
spirit.</q><note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Plateau of Northern Nigeria</hi>,
p. 83.</note> Sometimes the spirits of departed chiefs are
reincarnated in animals, which are then revered as the
abodes of the dead rulers. Thus the paramount chief of
the Amambwe is incarnated after death in the form of a
young lion, while Bisa and Wiwa chiefs come back in the
shape of pythons. In one of the rest-houses near Fife
a tame python waxed fat on the offerings of fowls and sour
beer which the Winamwanga presented to it in the fond
belief that it housed the spirit of one of their dead chiefs.
One day unfortunately for himself the reptile deity ventured
to dispute the possession of the rest-house with a German
cattle-dealer who was passing by; a discharge of shot
settled the dispute in favour of the cattle-dealer, and the
worshippers of the deity beheld him no more.<note place='foot'>C. Gouldsbury and H. Sheane,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 84.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Belief of
the
Barotse in
a supreme
god
Niambe.</note>
Another Bantu people who worship the spirits of their
dead kings are the Barotse or Marotse of the Upper
Zambesi. The Barotse believe in a supreme god, the
creator of all things, whom they call Niambe. He lives
in the sun, and by his marriage with the moon begat the
world, the animals, and last of all men. But the cunning
and ferocity of his creature man terrified the beneficent
creator, so that he fled from earth and escaped up the
thread of a spider's web to heaven. There he still retains
a certain power to interfere in human affairs, and that is
why men sometimes pray and sacrifice to him. For
example, the worshipper salutes the rising sun and offers
him a vessel of water, no doubt to quench the thirst of
the deity on his hot journey across the sky. Again, when
a long drought has prevailed, a black ox is sacrificed to
Niambe <q>as a symbol of the clouds big with the longed-for
rain.</q> And before they sow the fields, the women pile the
seeds and their digging hoes in a heap, and pray to the god
that he would render their labour fruitful.<note place='foot'>Eugène Béguin, <hi rend='italic'>Les Ma-rotsé</hi>
(Lausanne and Fontaines, 1903), pp.
118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
worship of
dead kings
among the
Barotse.</note>
Yet while they acknowledge the divine supremacy of
Niambe, the Barotse address their prayers most frequently
to the inferior deities, the <foreign rend='italic'>ditino</foreign>, who are the deified kings
of the country. The tombs of the departed monarchs may
be seen near the villages which they inhabited in life. Each
tomb stands in a grove of beautiful trees and is encircled by
a tall palisade of pointed stakes, covered with fine mats, like
the palisade which surrounds the royal residence of a living
king. Such an enclosure is sacred; the people are forbidden
to enter it lest they should disturb the ghost of him
who sleeps below. But the inhabitants of the nearest village
are charged with the duty of keeping the tomb and the enclosure
in good order, repairing the palisade, and replacing
the mats when they are worn out. Once a month, at the
new moon, the women sweep not only the grave and the
enclosure but the whole village. The guardian of the tomb
is at the same time a priest; he acts as intermediary between
the god and the people who come to pray to the deity.
He bears the title of Ngomboti; he alone has the right to
enter the sacred enclosure; the profane multitude must stand
at a respectful distance. Even the king himself, when he
comes to consult one of his ancestors, is forbidden to set
foot on the holy ground. In presence of the god, or, as
they call him, the Master of the Tomb, the monarch must
bear himself like a slave in the presence of his lord. He
kneels down near the entrance, claps his hands, and gives
the royal salute; and from within the enclosure the priest
solemnly returns the salute, just as the king himself, when
he holds his court, returns the salute of his subjects. Then
the suppliant, whether king or commoner, makes his petition
to the deity and deposits his offering; for no man may pray
to the god with empty hands. Inside the enclosure, close
to the entrance, is a hole which is supposed to serve as a
channel of communication with the spirit of the deified king.
In it the offerings are placed. Often they consist of milk
which is poured into the hole; and the faster it drains
away, the more favourably inclined is the god thought to be
to the petitioner. More solid offerings, such as flesh, clothes,
and glass beads, become the property of the priest after they
have been allowed to lie for a decent time beside the sacred
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
aperture of the tomb. The spirits of dead kings are thus
consulted on matters of public concern as well as by private
individuals touching their own affairs. If a war is to be
waged, if a plague is raging among the people or a murrain
among the cattle, if the land is parched with drought, in
short, if any danger threatens or any calamity has afflicted
the country, recourse is had to these local gods, dwelling
each in his shady grove, not far from the abodes of the
living. They are near, but the great god in heaven is far
away. What wonder, therefore, that their help is often
sought while he is neglected? They are national heroes as
well as gods; their history is remembered; men tell of the
doughty deeds they did in their lifetime; why should they
not be able to succour their votaries now that they have put
on immortality? All over the country these temple-tombs
may be seen. They serve as historical monuments to recall
to the people the names of their former kings and the annals
of their country. One of the most popular of the royal
shrines is near Senanga at the southern end of the great
plain of the Barotse. Voyagers who go down the Zambesi
do not fail to pay their devotions at the shrine, that the god
of the place may make their voyage to prosper and may
guard the frail canoe from shipwreck in the rush and roar
of the rapids; and when they return in safety they repair
again to the sacred spot to deposit a thank-offering for the
protection of the deity.<note place='foot'>Eugène Béguin, <hi rend='italic'>Les Ba-rotsé</hi>, pp. 120-123. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and
Exogamy</hi>, iv. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus the
worship
of dead
kings has
been an
important
element in
the religion
of many
African
tribes.</note>
The foregoing examples suffice to prove that the worship
of dead chiefs and kings has been an important, perhaps we
may even say, the most important element in the religion
of many African tribes. Regarded from the native point
of view nothing could be more natural. The king rules
over his people in life; and since all these tribes entertain
a firm and unquestioning belief not only in the existence
but in the power of the spirits of the dead, they necessarily
conclude that of all the departed spirits none can be so
potent for good or evil, none therefore need to be propitiated
so earnestly by prayer and sacrifice, as the souls of
dead kings. Thus while every family worships privately the
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
spirits of its own ancestors, the whole tribe worships publicly
the spirits of its departed monarchs, paying to each of these
invisible potentates, whose reality they never dream of
doubting, a homage of precisely the same sort as that which
they render to his living successor on the throne. Such a
religion of the dead is by no means incompatible with the
recognition of higher spiritual powers who may have an origin
quite independent of the worship of ancestors. We have
seen in point of fact that many tribes, whose practical religion
is concentrated chiefly on their dead, nevertheless
acknowledge the existence of a supreme god, the creator of
man and of all things, whom they do not regard as a
glorified ghost. The Baganda, the most progressive and
advanced of all the Bantu tribes, had a whole pantheon of
gods whom they sharply distinguished from the worshipful
spirits of their forefathers.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Perhaps
some
African
gods, who
are now
distinguished
from
ghosts,
were once
dead men.</note>
Yet in spite of this distinction we may suspect that in many
cases the seeming line of division between gods and worshipful
ghosts is deceptive; and that the magic touch of time, which
distorts and magnifies the past, especially among peoples who
see it only through the haze of oral tradition, has glorified and
transfigured many a dead man into a deity. This at all
events seems to have been the history of some of the Baganda
gods. On this subject our best authority says that <q>the
principal gods appear to have been at one time human
beings, noted for their skill and bravery, who were afterwards
deified by the people and invested with supernatural
powers.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi> (London, 1911), p. 271.</note> <q>Mukasa held the highest rank among the gods
of Uganda. He was a benign god; he never asked for the
life of any human being, but animals were sacrificed to him
at the yearly festivals, and also at other times when the
king, or a leading chief, wished to consult him. He had
nothing to do with war, but sought to heal the bodies and
minds of men. He was the god of plenty; he gave the
people an increase of food, cattle, and children. From the
legends still current it seems to be almost certain that he
was a human being who, because of his benevolence, came
to be regarded as a god.... The legends about Mukasa
are of great interest; they show how the human element
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
has been lost in the divine, how the natural has been effaced
by the supernatural, until, in the minds of the common
people, only the supernatural remains.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 290,
291. In the worship of Mukasa <q>the
principal ceremony was the annual
festival, when the king sent his presents
to the god, to secure a blessing
on the crops and on the people for the
year.</q> (J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 298).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
human
remains of
Kibuka,
the war-god
of the
Baganda.</note>
If we cannot prove that the great god Mukasa himself
was once a man, we have very tangible evidence that his
brother the war-god Kibuka was so. For like the dead kings
of Uganda, Kibuka was worshipped in a great conical hut
resembling the huts which living people inhabit: like them,
his spirit was supposed to enter from time to time into the
body of his priest and to give oracles through him; and like
them he was represented in his temple by his personal relics,
his jawbone and his navel-string, which were rescued from
the ruins of his temple and now rest in the Ethnological
Museum at Cambridge. In face of this complete parallelism
between the god and the kings whose personal existence is
not open to question, it seems difficult to doubt that Kibuka
was once like them a real man, and that he spoke with the
jawbone and made bodily use of the other corporeal organs
which were preserved in his temple.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <q>Kibuka, the
War God of the Baganda,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Man</hi>, vii.
(1907) pp. 161-166; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 301-308. Among the personal
relics of Kibuka kept in his temple
were his genital organs; these also
were rescued when the Mohammedans
burned down his temple in the civil
wars of 1887-1890. They are now
with the rest of the god's, or rather
the man's, remains at Cambridge.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus it is
possible
that Osiris
and Isis
may have
been a
real king
and queen
of Egypt,
perhaps
identical
with King
Khent and
his queen.</note>
These analogies lend some support to the theory that in
ancient Egypt, where the kings were worshipped by their
people both in life and death, Osiris may have been originally
nothing but one of these deified monarchs whose worship
gradually eclipsed that of all the rest and ended by rivalling
or even surpassing that of the great sun-god himself. We
have seen that at Abydos, one of the principal centres of his
worship, the tomb of Osiris was identified with the tomb of
King Khent, one of the earliest monarchs of the first Egyptian
dynasty, and that in this tomb were found a woman's richly
jewelled arm and a human skull lacking the lower jawbone,
which may well be the head of the king himself and the
arm of his queen. The carved monument of Osiris which was
found in the sepulchral chamber appears indeed to be a
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
work of late Egyptian art, but it may have replaced an earlier
sarcophagus. Certainly we may reasonably suppose that the
identification of the tomb of Osiris with the tomb of King
Khent was very ancient; for though the priests may have
renewed the sculptured effigy of the dead god, they would
hardly dare to shift the site of the Holy Sepulchre.<note place='foot'>This consideration is rightly urged
by H. Schäfer as a strong argument in
favour of the antiquity of the tradition
which associated the grave of Osiris
with the grave of King Khent. See
H. Schäfer, <hi rend='italic'>Die Mysterien des Osiris
in Abydos</hi> (Leipsic, 1904), pp. 28
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now
the sepulchre is distant about a mile and a half from the
temple in which Osiris was worshipped as a god. There is
thus a curious coincidence, if there is nothing more, between
the worship of Osiris and the worship of the dead kings of
Uganda. As a dead king of Uganda was worshipped in a
temple, while his headless body reposed at some distance in
a royal tomb, and his head, without the lower jawbone, was
buried by itself near the grave, so Osiris was worshipped
in a temple not far from the royal tomb which tradition
identified with his grave. Perhaps after all tradition
was right. It is possible, though it would be very rash to
affirm, that Osiris was no other than the historical King
Khent of the first dynasty;<note place='foot'>One of the commonest and oldest
titles of Osiris was Chent (Khent)-Ament
or Chenti (Khenti)-Amenti, as
the name is also written. It means
<q>Chief of those who are in the West</q>
and refers to the Egyptian belief that
the souls of the dead go westward.
See R. V. Lanzone, <hi rend='italic'>Dizionario di
Mitologia Egizia</hi>, p. 727; H. Brugsch,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie der alten
Aegypter</hi>, p. 617; A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Die
ägyptische Religion</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 23, 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
J. H. Breasted, <hi rend='italic'>Development of Religion
and Thought in Ancient Egypt</hi>,
pp. 38, 143 (who spells the name
Khenti-Amentiu); E. A. Wallis Budge,
<hi rend='italic'>Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection</hi>,
i. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 67. <q>Khenti-Amenti was
one of the oldest gods of Abydos, and
was certainly connected with the dead,
being probably the ancient local god
of the dead of Abydos and its neighbourhood.
Now, in the Pyramid Texts,
which were written under the VIth
dynasty, there are several mentions of
Khenti-Amenti, and in a large number
of instances the name is preceded by
that of Osiris. It is quite clear, therefore,
that the chief attributes of the one
god must have resembled those of the
other, and that Osiris Khenti-Amenti
was assumed to have absorbed the
powers of Khenti-Amenti. In the
representations of the two gods which
are found at Abydos there is usually
no difference, at least not under the
XVIIIth and XIXth dynasties</q> (E. A.
Wallis Budge, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 31). However,
it would be unsafe to infer that
the resemblance between the name of
the god and the name of the king is
more than accidental.</note> that the skull found in the
tomb is the skull of Osiris himself; and that while it reposed
in the grave the missing jawbone was preserved, like the
jawbone of a dead king of Uganda, as a holy and perhaps
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
oracular relic in the neighbouring temple. If that were so,
we should be almost driven to conclude that the bejewelled
woman's arm found in the tomb of Osiris is the arm of Isis.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Suggested
parallel
between
Osiris and
Charlemagne.</note>
In support of the conclusion that the myth and religion
of Osiris grew up round the revered memory of a dead man
we may quote the words in which the historian of European
morals describes the necessity under which the popular
imagination labours of embodying its cherished ideals in
living persons. He is referring to the dawn of the age of
chivalry, when in the morning twilight the heroic figure of
Charlemagne rose like a bright star above the political
horizon, to be thenceforth encircled by a halo of romance
like the nimbus that shone round the head of Osiris. <q>In
order that the tendencies I have described should acquire
their full force, it was necessary that they should be represented
or illustrated in some great personage, who, by the
splendour and the beauty of his career, could fascinate the
imaginations of men. It is much easier to govern great
masses of men through their imagination than through their
reason. Moral principles rarely act powerfully upon the
world, except by way of example or ideals. When the
course of events has been to glorify the ascetic or monarchical
or military spirit, a great saint, or sovereign, or
soldier will arise, who will concentrate in one dazzling focus
the blind tendencies of his time, kindle the enthusiasm and
fascinate the imagination of the people. But for the prevailing
tendency, the great man would not have arisen, or
would not have exercised his great influence. But for the
great man, whose career appealed vividly to the imagination,
the prevailing tendency would never have acquired its
full intensity.</q><note place='foot'>W. E. H. Lecky, <hi rend='italic'>History of
European Morals from Augustus to
Charlemagne</hi>, Third Edition (London,
1877), ii. 271.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
question
of the
historical
reality of
Osiris
left open.</note>
Whether the parallel thus suggested between Charlemagne,
the mediaeval ideal of a Christian knight, and Osiris,
the ancient Egyptian ideal of a just and beneficent monarch,
holds good or not, it is now impossible to determine. For
while Charlemagne stands near enough to allow us clearly
to discern his historical reality, Osiris is so remote that we
can no longer discriminate with any certitude between the
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
elements of history and fable which appear to have blended
in his traditional character. I am content to indicate bare
possibilities: dogmatism on such points would be in the
highest degree rash and unbecoming. Whether Osiris and
Isis were from first to last purely imaginary beings, the
ideal creations of a primitive philosophy, or whether they
were originally a real man and woman about whom after
death the myth-making fancy wove its gossamer rainbow-tinted
web, is a question to which I am not bold enough to
give a decided answer.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. Mother-Kin And Mother Goddesses.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Dying Gods and Mourning Goddesses.'/>
<head>§ 1. Dying Gods and Mourning Goddesses.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Essential
similarity
of Adonis,
Attis, and
Osiris.</note>
We have now concluded our inquiry into the nature and
worship of the three Oriental deities Adonis, Attis, and
Osiris. The substantial similarity of their mythical character
justifies us in treating of them together. All three apparently
embodied the powers of fertility in general and of
vegetation in particular. All three were believed to have
died and risen again from the dead; and the divine death
and resurrection of all three were dramatically represented
at annual festivals, which their worshippers celebrated with
alternate transports of sorrow and joy, of weeping and
exultation. The natural phenomena thus mythically conceived
and mythically represented were the great changes of
the seasons, especially the most striking and impressive
of all, the decay and revival of vegetation; and the intention
of the sacred dramas was to refresh and strengthen, by
sympathetic magic, the failing energies of nature, in order
that the trees should bear fruit, that the corn should ripen,
that men and animals should reproduce their kinds.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The superiority
of the
goddesses
associated
with
Adonis,
Attis, and
Osiris
points to a
system of
mother-kin.</note>
But the three gods did not stand by themselves. The
mythical personification of nature, of which all three were
in at least one aspect the products, required that each of
them should be coupled with a goddess, and in each case it
appears that originally the goddess was a more powerful
and important personage than the god. At all events it is
always the god rather than the goddess who comes to a sad
end, and whose death is annually mourned. Thus, whereas
Osiris was slain by Typhon, his divine spouse Isis survived
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
and brought him to life again. This feature of the myth
seems to indicate that in the beginning Isis was, what
Astarte and Cybele always continued to be, the stronger
divinity of the pair. Now the superiority thus assigned to
the goddess over the god is most naturally explained as the
result of a social system in which maternity counted for
more than paternity, descent being traced and property
handed down through women rather than through men. At
all events this explanation cannot be deemed intrinsically
improbable if we can show that the supposed cause has produced
the very same effect among existing peoples, about
whose institutions we possess accurate information. This I
will now endeavour to do.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Influence of Mother-Kin on Religion.'/>
<head>§ 2. Influence of Mother-Kin on Religion.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mother-kin
and father-kin.
The
Khasis of
Assam
have
mother-kin,
and
among
them
goddesses
predominate
over
gods and
priestesses
over
priests.</note>
The social system which traces descent and transmits
property through the mother alone may be called mother-kin,
while the converse system which traces descent and
transmits property through the father alone may be called
father-kin.<note place='foot'>I have adopted the terms <q>mother-kin</q>
and <q>father-kin</q> as less ambiguous
than the terms <q>mother-right</q>
and <q>father-right,</q> which I formerly
employed in the same sense.</note> A good example of the influence which mother-kin
may exert on religion is furnished by the Khasis of Assam,
whose customs and beliefs have lately been carefully recorded
by a British officer specially charged with the study of the
native races of the province.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Khasis</hi>, by Major P. R. T.
Gurdon, I.A., Deputy Commissioner
Eastern Bengal and Assam Commission,
and Superintendent of Ethnography in
Assam (London, 1907).</note> Like the ancient Egyptians
and the Semites of Syria and Mesopotamia, the Khasis live
in settled villages and maintain themselves chiefly by the
cultivation of the ground; yet <q>their social organization
presents one of the most perfect examples still surviving of
matriarchal institutions, carried out with a logic and thoroughness
which, to those accustomed to regard the status and
authority of the father as the foundation of society, are
exceedingly remarkable. Not only is the mother the head
and source, and only bond of union, of the family: in the
most primitive part of the hills, the Synteng country, she
is the only owner of real property, and through her alone is
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
inheritance transmitted.<note place='foot'><q>The Khasi saying is, <q><foreign rend='italic'>long jaid
na ka kynthei</foreign></q> (from the woman sprang
the clan). The Khasis, when reckoning
descent, count from the mother
only; they speak of a family of brothers
and sisters, who are the great grandchildren
of one great grandmother, as
<foreign rend='italic'>shi kpoh</foreign>, which, being literally translated,
is one womb, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the issue of
one womb. The man is nobody</q>
(P. R. T. Gurdon, <hi rend='italic'>The Khasis</hi>, p. 82).
<q>All land acquired by inheritance must
follow the Khasi law of entail, by which
property descends from the mother to
the youngest daughter, and again from
the latter to her youngest daughter.
Ancestral landed property must therefore
be always owned by women. The
male members of the family may cultivate
such lands, but they must carry
all the produce to the house of their
mother, who will divide it amongst the
members of the family</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 88).
<q>The rule amongst the Khasis is that
the youngest daughter <q>holds</q> the
religion, <q><foreign rend='italic'>ka bat ka niam</foreign>.</q> Her house
is called, <q><foreign rend='italic'>ka iing seng</foreign>,</q> and it is here
that the members of the family assemble
to witness her performance of the family
ceremonies. Hers is, therefore, the
largest share of the family property,
because it is she whose duty it is to
perform the family ceremonies, and
propitiate the family ancestors</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 83).</note> The father has no kinship with
his children, who belong to their mother's clan; what he
earns goes to his own matriarchal stock, and at his death
his bones are deposited in the cromlech of his mother's kin.
In Jowai he neither lives nor eats in his wife's house, but
visits it only after dark. In the veneration of ancestors,
which is the foundation of the tribal piety, the primal
ancestress (<foreign rend='italic'>Ka Iāwbei</foreign>) and her brother are the only persons
regarded. The flat memorial stones set up to perpetuate
the memory of the dead are called after the woman who
represents the clan (<foreign rend='italic'>māw kynthei</foreign>), and the standing stones
ranged behind them are dedicated to the male kinsmen on
the mother's side. In harmony with this scheme of ancestor
worship, the other spirits to whom propitiation is offered are
mainly female, though here male personages also figure.
The powers of sickness and death are all female, and these
are those most frequently worshipped. The two protectors
of the household are goddesses, though with them is also
revered the first father of the clan, <foreign rend='italic'>U Thāwlang</foreign>. Priestesses
assist at all sacrifices, and the male officiants are
only their deputies; in one important state, Khyrim, the
High Priestess and actual head of the State is a woman,
who combines in her person sacerdotal and regal functions.</q><note place='foot'>Sir C. J. Lyall, in his Introduction
to <hi rend='italic'>The Khasis</hi>, by Major P. R. T.
Gurdon, pp. xxiii. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Sir C. J. Lyall
himself lived for many years among
the Khasis and studied their customs.
For the details of the evidence on which
his summary is based see especially pp.
63 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 76, 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 88, 106
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 109 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 121, 150, of
Major Gurdon's book. As to the Khasi
priestesses, see above, vol. i. p. 46.</note>
Thus amongst the Khasis of the present day the
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
superiority of the goddess to the god, and especially of
the revered ancestress to the revered ancestor, is based
directly on the social system which traces descent and
transmits property through women only. It is not unreasonable
therefore to suppose that in Western Asia the
superiority of the Mother Goddess to the Father God
originated in the same archaic system of mother-kin.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Again, the
Pelew
Islanders
have
mother-kin,
and
the deities
of their
clans are all
goddesses.</note>
Another instance of the same cause producing the
same effect may be drawn from the institutions of the
Pelew Islanders, which have been described by an accurate
observer long resident in the islands. These people, who
form a branch of the Micronesian stock, are divided into
a series of exogamous families or clans with descent in
the female line,<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi> (Berlin, 1885), pp.
35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The writer calls one of these
kins indifferently a <foreign rend='italic'>Familie</foreign> or a
<foreign rend='italic'>Stamm</foreign>.</note> so that, as usually happens under such a
system, a man's heirs are not his own children but the
children of his sister or of his maternal aunt.<note place='foot'>J. S. Kubary, <q>Die Todtenbestattung
auf den Pelau-Inseln,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Original-Mittheilungen
aus der ethnologischen
Abtheilung der königlichen Museen zu
Berlin</hi>, i. (Berlin, 1885) p. 7.</note> Every family
or clan traces its descent from a woman, the common mother
of the whole kin,<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, p. 40.</note> and accordingly the members of the clan
worship a goddess, not a god.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi> (Berlin,
1888), i. 20-22. The writer says that
the family or clan gods of the Pelew
Islanders are too many to be enumerated,
but he gives as a specimen a list
of the family deities of one particular
district (Ngarupesang). Having done
so he observes that they are all goddesses,
and he adds that <q>this is
explained by the importance of the
woman for the clan. The deity of the
mother is inherited, that of the father
is not</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 22). As he says
nothing to indicate that the family
deities of this particular district are
exceptional, we may infer, as I have
done, that the deities of all the families
or clans are goddesses. Yet a few
pages previously (pp. 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) he tells us
that a village which contains twenty
families will have at least forty deities,
if not more, <q>for some houses may
have two <foreign rend='italic'>kalids</foreign> [deities], and every
house has also a goddess.</q> This seems
to imply that the families or clans have
gods as well as goddesses. The seeming
discrepancy is perhaps to be explained
by another statement of the
writer that <q>in the family only the
<foreign rend='italic'>kalids</foreign> [deities] of the women count</q>
(<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>sich geltend machen</foreign>,</q> J. Kubary,
<hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer</hi>,
p. 38).</note> These families or clans, with
female descent and a worship of goddesses rather than of
gods, are grouped together in villages, each village comprising
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
about a score of clans and forming with its lands a petty
independent state.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, pp. 33 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 63;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Die Religion der Pelauer,</q> in A.
Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi>,
i. 16.</note> Every such village-state has its special
deity or deities, generally a god and a goddess. But these
political deities of the villages are said to be directly derived
from the domestic deities of the families or clans,<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi>, i. 15-17,
22, 25-27.</note> from
which it seems to follow that among these people gods are
historically later than goddesses and have been developed
out of them.<note place='foot'>From the passages cited in the
preceding note it appears that this was
Kubary's opinion, though he has not
stated it explicitly.</note> The late origin of the gods as compared
with the goddesses is further indicated by the nature of their
names.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi>, i. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This preference
for
goddesses
is to be
explained
by the
importance
of women
in the
social
system of
the Pelew
Islanders.</note>
This preference for goddesses over gods in the clans of
the Pelew Islanders has been explained, no doubt rightly,
by the high importance of women in the social system of
the people.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, p. 38. See also
above, p. 204, note 4.</note> For the existence of the clan depends entirely
on the life of the women, not at all upon the life of the men.
If the women survive, it is no matter though every man of
the clan should perish; for the women will, as usual, marry
men of another clan, and their offspring will inherit their
mother's clan, thereby prolonging its existence. Whereas
if the women of the clan all die out, the clan necessarily
becomes extinct, even though every man of it should survive;
for the men must, as usual, marry women of another
clan, and their offspring will inherit their mothers' clan, not
the clan of their fathers, which accordingly, with the death
of the fathers, is wiped out from the community. Hence in
these islands women bear the titles of <foreign rend='italic'>Adhalál a pelú</foreign>,
<q>Mothers of the Land,</q> and <foreign rend='italic'>Adhalál a blay</foreign>, <q>Mothers of
the Clan,</q> and they are said to enjoy complete equality with
the men in every respect.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Indeed, in one passage our principal
authority speaks of <q>the predominance of feminine
influence in the social condition of the people,</q> and asserts
without qualification that the women are politically and
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
socially superior to the men.<note place='foot'>See the statement of Kubary
quoted in the next paragraph.</note> The eldest women of the clan
exercise, he tells us, the most decisive influence on the conduct
of its affairs, and the headman does nothing without
full consultation with them, a consultation which in the great
houses extends to affairs of state and foreign politics.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, p. 39.</note> Nay,
these elder women are even esteemed and treated as equal
to the deities in their lifetime.<note place='foot'>See the statement of Kubary quoted
in the next paragraph.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The high
position of
women in
the Pelew
Islands has
also an
industrial
basis; for
they alone
cultivate
the taro,
the staple
food of
the people.</note>
But the high position which women thus take in Pelew
society is not a result of mother-kin only. It has an industrial
as well as a kinship basis. For the Pelew Islanders
subsist mainly on the produce of their taro fields, and the
cultivation of this, their staple food, is the business of the
women alone. <q>This cardinal branch of Pelew agriculture,
which is of paramount importance for the subsistence of the
people, is left entirely in the hands of the women. This
fact may have contributed materially to the predominance
of female influence in the social condition of the people.
The women do not merely bestow life on the people, they
also do that which is most essential for the preservation of
life, and therefore they are called <foreign rend='italic'>Adhalál a pelú</foreign>, the
<q>Mothers of the Land,</q> and are politically and socially
superior to men. Only their offspring enjoy the privilege of
membership of the state (the children of the men are, strictly
speaking, strangers destitute of rights), and the oldest women
of the families are esteemed and treated as equal to deities
even in their lifetime, and they exercise a decisive influence
on the conduct of affairs of state. No chief would venture
to come to a decision without first consulting with the
<foreign rend='italic'>Adhalál a blay</foreign>, the <q>Mothers of the Family.</q> From this
point of view it is impossible to regard the assignment
of the taro cultivation to women as a consequence of
their subordinate position in society: the women themselves
do not so regard it. The richest woman of the village looks
with pride on her taro patch, and although she has female
followers enough to allow her merely to superintend the
work without taking part in it, she nevertheless prefers to
lay aside her fine apron and to betake herself to the deep
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
mire, clad in a small apron that hardly hides her nakedness,
with a little mat on her back to protect her from the
burning heat of the sun, and with a shade of banana leaves
for her eyes. There, dripping with sweat in the burning
sun and coated with mud to the hips and over the elbows,
she toils to set the younger women a good example.
Moreover, as in every other occupation, the <foreign rend='italic'>kaliths</foreign>, the gods,
must also be invoked, and who could be better fitted for the
discharge of so important a duty than the Mother of the
House?</q><note place='foot'>J. S. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Beiträge zur Kenntniss des Karolinen
Archipels</hi> (Leyden, 1895), p. 159. On
the importance of the taro or sweet
potato as the staple food of the people,
see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> pp. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It seems clear that in any agricultural people
who, like the Pelew Islanders, retain mother-kin and depute
the labours of husbandry to women, the conception of a
great Mother Goddess, the divine source of all fertility,
might easily originate. Perhaps the same social and industrial
conditions may have combined to develop the great
Mother Goddesses of Western Asia and Egypt.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Both men
and women
in the
Pelew
Islands
attain to
power by
posing
as the
inspired
mouthpieces
of
the gods.</note>
But in the Pelew Islands women have yet another road
to power. For some of them are reputed to be the wives of
gods, and act as their oracular mouthpieces. Such prophetesses
are called <foreign rend='italic'>Amlaheys</foreign>, and no surprise is felt when one
of them is brought to bed. Her child passes for the offspring
of the god, her divine husband, and goes about with his hair
hanging loose in token of his superhuman parentage. It is
thought that no mortal man would dare to intrigue with one
of these human wives of a god, since the jealous deity would
surely visit the rash culprit with deadly sickness and a
lingering decline.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi>, i. 34.</note> But in these islands men as well as
women are often possessed by a deity and speak in his
name. Under his inspiration they mimic, often with great
histrionic skill, the particular appearance and manner which
are believed to be characteristic of the indwelling divinity.
These inspired men (<foreign rend='italic'>Korongs</foreign>) usually enjoy great consideration
and exert a powerful influence over the whole community.
They always acquire wealth in the exercise of their profession.
When they are not themselves chiefs, they are treated as chiefs
or even preferred to them. In not a few places the deity whom
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
they personate is also the political head of the land; and
in that case his inspired priest, however humble his origin,
ranks as a spiritual king and rules over all the chiefs.
Indeed we are told that, with the physical and intellectual
decay of the race, the power of the priests is more and more
in the ascendant and threatens, if unchecked, to develop
before long into an absolute theocracy which will swallow up
every other form of government.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi>, i. 30-35.
The author wrote thus in the year
1883, and his account of the Pelew
religion was published in 1888. Compare
his work <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, p. 81. Great
changes have probably taken place in
the islands since Kubary wrote.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Parallel
between
the Pelew
Islands of
to-day
and the
religious
and social
state of
Western
Asia and
Egypt in
antiquity.</note>
Thus the present, or at least the recent, state of society
and religion in the Pelew Islands presents some interesting
parallels to the social and religious condition of Western
Asia and Egypt in early days, if the conclusions reached in
this work are correct. In both regions we see a
society based on mother-kin developing a religion in which
goddesses of the clan originally occupied the foremost
place, though in later times, as the clans coalesced into states,
the old goddesses have been rivalled and to some extent
supplanted by the new male gods of the enlarged pantheon.
But in the religion of the Pelew Islanders, as in that of the
Khasis and the ancient Egyptians, the balance of power
has never wholly shifted from the female to the male line,
because society has never passed from mother-kin to father-kin.
And in the Pelew Islands as in the ancient East we see
the tide of political power running strongly in the direction of
theocracy, the people resigning the conduct of affairs into
the hands of men who claimed to rule them in the name
of the gods. In the Pelew Islands such men might have
developed into divine kings like those of Babylon and Egypt,
if the natural course of evolution had not been cut short
by the intervention of Europe.<note place='foot'>For some other parallels between
the state of society and religion in
these two regions, see Note IV. at the
end of the volume.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mother-kin
does not
imply that
the government
is in
the hands
of women.</note>
The evidence of the Khasis and the Pelew Islanders, two
peoples very remote and very different from each other,
suffices to prove that the influence which mother-kin
may exert on religion is real and deep. But in order
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
to dissipate misapprehensions, which appear to be rife
on this subject, it may be well to remind or inform the
reader that the ancient and widespread custom of tracing
descent and inheriting property through the mother
alone does not by any means imply that the government
of the tribes which observe the custom is in the hands of
women; in short, it should always be borne in mind that
mother-kin does not mean mother-rule. On the contrary,
the practice of mother-kin prevails most extensively
amongst the lowest savages, with whom woman, instead of
being the ruler of man, is always his drudge and often
little better than his slave. Indeed, so far is the system
from implying any social superiority of women that it
probably took its rise from what we should regard as their
deepest degradation, to wit, from a state of society in which
the relations of the sexes were so loose and vague that
children could not be fathered on any particular man.<note place='foot'>Compare E. Stephan und F.
Graebner, <hi rend='italic'>Neu-Mecklenburg</hi> (Berlin,
1907), p. 107 note 1: <q>It is necessary
always to repeat emphatically that the
terms father-right and mother-right
indicate simply and solely the group-membership
of the individual and the
systems of relationship which that
membership implies, but that they have
nothing at all to do with the higher or
lower position of women. Rather the
opposite might be affirmed, namely,
that woman is generally more highly
esteemed in places where father-right
prevails than in places where mother-right
is the rule.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The inheritance
of
property,
especially
of landed
property,
through
the mother
certainly
tends to
raise the
social
importance
of women,
but this
tendency
is never
carried so
far as to
subordinate
men
politically
to women.</note>
When we pass from the purely savage state to that
higher plane of culture in which the accumulation of property,
and especially of landed property, has become a
powerful instrument of social and political influence, we
naturally find that wherever the ancient preference for the
female line of descent has been retained, it tends to increase
the importance and enhance the dignity of woman; and her
aggrandizement is most marked in princely families, where
she either herself holds royal authority as well as private
property, or at least transmits them both to her consort or
her children. But this social advance of women has never
been carried so far as to place men as a whole in a position
of political subordination to them. Even where the system
of mother-kin in regard to descent and property has prevailed
most fully, the actual government has generally, if
not invariably, remained in the hands of men. Exceptions
have no doubt occurred; women have occasionally arisen
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
who by sheer force of character have swayed for a time the
destinies of their people. But such exceptions are rare and
their effects transitory; they do not affect the truth of the
general rule that human society has been governed in the
past and, human nature remaining the same, is likely to
be governed in the future, mainly by masculine force and
masculine intelligence.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus while
the Khasis
and Pelew
Islanders
have
mother-kin,
they
are
governed
by men,
not by
women.</note>
To this rule the Khasis, with their elaborate system of
mother-kin, form no exception. For among them, while
landed property is both transmitted through women and
held by women alone, political power is transmitted indeed
through women, but is held by men; in other words, the
Khasi tribes are, with a single exception, governed by kings,
not by queens. And even in the one tribe, which is nominally
ruled by women, the real power is delegated by the reigning
queen or High Priestess to her son, her nephew, or a more
distant male relation. In all the other tribes the kingship
may be held by a woman only on the failure of all male
heirs in the female line.<note place='foot'>Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <hi rend='italic'>The
Khasis</hi>, pp. 66-71. The rule of
succession is as follows. A <foreign rend='italic'>Siem</foreign>, or
king, <q>is succeeded by the eldest of
his uterine brothers; failing such
brothers, by the eldest of his sisters'
sons; failing such nephews, by the
eldest of the sons of his sisters'
daughters; failing such grand-nephews,
by the eldest of the sons of his mother's
sisters; and, failing such first cousins,
by the eldest of his male cousins on
the female side, other than first cousins,
those nearest in degree of relationship
having prior claim. If there were no
heirs male, as above, he would be succeeded
by the eldest of his uterine
sisters; in the absence of such sisters,
by the eldest of his sisters' daughters;
failing such nieces, by the eldest of the
daughters of his sisters' daughters;
failing such grand-nieces, by the eldest
of the daughters of his mother's sisters;
and failing such first cousins, by the
eldest of his female cousins on the
female side, other than first cousins,
those nearest in degree of relationship
having prior claim. A female <foreign rend='italic'>Siem</foreign>
would be succeeded by her eldest son,
and so on</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 71). The rule
illustrates the logical precision with
which the system of mother-kin is
carried out by these people even when
the intention is actually to exclude
women from power.</note> So far is mother-kin from implying
mother-rule. A Khasi king inherits power in right
of his mother, but he exercises it in his own. Similarly
the Pelew Islanders, in spite of their system of mother-kin,
are governed by chiefs, not by chieftainesses. It
is true that there are chieftainesses, and that they
indirectly exercise much influence; but their direct
authority is limited to the affairs of women, especially to
the administration of the women's clubs or associations, which
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
answer to the clubs or associations of the men.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, pp. 35, 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
73-83. See also above, pp. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> And
to take another example, the Melanesians, like the Khasis
and the Pelew Islanders, have the system of mother-kin,
being similarly divided into exogamous clans with descent in
the female line; <q>but it must be understood that the
mother is in no way the head of the family. The house of
the family is the father's, the garden is his, the rule and
government are his.</q><note place='foot'>R. H. Codrington, <hi rend='italic'>The Melanesians</hi>
(Oxford, 1891), p. 34.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The theory
of a gynaecocracy
and of the
predominance
of
the female
imagination
in
religion
is an
idle dream.</note>
We may safely assume that the practice has been the
same among all the many peoples who have retained the
ancient system of mother-kin under a monarchical constitution.
In Africa, for example, the chieftainship or
kingship often descends in the female line, but it is men,
not women, who inherit it.<note place='foot'>See A. H. Post, <hi rend='italic'>Afrikanische
Jurisprudenz</hi> (Oldenburg and Leipsic,
1887), i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Captain W. Gill
reports that the Su-Mu, a Man-Tzŭ
tribe in Southern China numbering
some three and a half millions, is
always ruled by a queen (<hi rend='italic'>The River of
Golden Sand</hi>, London, 1880, i. 365).
But Capt. Gill was not nearer to
the tribe than a six days' journey;
and even if his report is correct we
may suppose that the real power is
exercised by men, just as it is in the
solitary Khasi tribe which is nominally
governed by a woman.</note> The theory of a gynaecocracy
is in truth a dream of visionaries and pedants. And equally
chimerical is the idea that the predominance of goddesses
under a system of mother-kin like that of the Khasis is a
creation of the female mind. If women ever created gods,
they would be more likely to give them masculine than
feminine features. In point of fact the great religious ideals
which have permanently impressed themselves on the world
seem always to have been a product of the male imagination.
Men make gods and women worship them. The combination
of ancestor-worship with mother-kin furnishes a simple
and sufficient explanation of the superiority of goddesses
over gods in a state of society where these conditions prevail.
Men naturally assign the first place in their devotions to
the ancestress from whom they trace their descent. We
need not resort to a fantastic hypothesis of the preponderance
of the feminine fancy in order to account for the facts.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But
mother-kin
is a solid
fact, which
can hardly
have failed
to modify
the religion
of the
peoples
who practise
it.</note>
The theory that under a system of mother-kin the
women rule the men and set up goddesses for them to
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
worship is indeed so improbable in itself, and so contrary
to experience, that it scarcely deserves the serious attention
which it appears to have received.<note place='foot'>The theory, or at all events the
latter part of it, has been carefully
examined by Dr. L. R. Farnell; and
if, as I apprehend, he rejects it, I
agree with him. See his article
<q>Sociological Hypotheses concerning
the position of Women in Ancient
Religion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
vii. (1904) pp. 70-94; his <hi rend='italic'>Cults of
the Greek States</hi> (Oxford, 1896-1909),
iii. 109 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; and <hi rend='italic'>The Hibbert Journal</hi>,
April 1907, p. 690. But I differ from
him, it seems, in thinking that mother-kin
is favourable to the growth of
mother goddesses.</note> But when we have
brushed aside these cobwebs, as we must do, we are still left
face to face with the solid fact of the wide prevalence of
mother-kin, that is, of a social system which traces descent
and transmits property through women and not through
men. That a social system so widely spread and so deeply
rooted should have affected the religion of the peoples who
practise it, may reasonably be inferred, especially when we
remember that in primitive communities the social relations
of the gods commonly reflect the social relations of their
worshippers. How the system of mother-kin may mould
religious ideas and customs, creating goddesses and assigning
at least a nominal superiority to priestesses over priests, is
shown with perfect lucidity by the example of the Khasis,
and hardly less clearly by the example of the Pelew Islanders.
It cannot therefore be rash to hold that what the system has
certainly done for these peoples, it may well have done for
many more. But unfortunately through lack of documentary
evidence we are seldom able to trace its influence so clearly.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Mother-Kin and Mother Goddesses in the Ancient East.'/>
<head>§ 3. Mother-Kin and Mother Goddesses in the
Ancient East.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mother-kin
and
mother-goddesses
in Western
Asia.</note>
While the combination of mother-kin in society with a
preference for goddesses in religion is to be found as a matter
of fact among the Khasis and Pelew Islanders of to-day, the
former prevalence of mother-kin in the lands where the great
goddesses Astarte and Cybele were worshipped is a matter
of inference only. In later times father-kin had certainly
displaced mother-kin among the Semitic worshippers of
Astarte, and probably the same change had taken place
among the Phrygian worshippers of Cybele. Yet the older
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
custom lingered in Lycia down to the historical period;<note place='foot'>The Lycians traced their descent
through women, not through men;
and among them it was the daughters,
not the sons, who inherited the family
property. See Herodotus, i. 174;
Nicolaus Damascenus, in Stobaeus,
<hi rend='italic'>Florilegium</hi>, xliv. 41 (<hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta
Historicorum Graecorum</hi>, ed. C.
Müller, iii. 461); Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De mulierum
virtutibus</hi>, 9. An ancient historian
even asserts that the Lycians
were ruled by women (ἐκ παλαιοῦ
γυναικοκρατοῦνται, Heraclides Ponticus,
Frag. 15, in <hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Historicorum
Graecorum</hi>, ed. C. Müller, ii. 217).
Inscriptions found at Dalisandos, in
Isauria, seem to prove that it was not
unusual there to trace descent through
the mother even in the third or the
fourth century after Christ. See Sir
W. M. Ramsay, <q>The Permanence of
Religion at Holy Places in the East,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>The Expositor</hi>, November 1906, p. 475.
Dr. L. Messerschmidt seems to think
that the Lycians were Hittites (<hi rend='italic'>The
Hittites</hi>, p. 20). Scholars are not
agreed as to the family of speech to
which the Lycian language belongs.
Some think that it was an Indo-European
tongue; but this view is
now abandoned by Professor Ed. Meyer
(<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 2. p. 626).</note>
and we may conjecture that in former times it was widely
spread through Asia Minor. The secluded situation and
rugged mountains of Lycia favoured the survival of a native
language and of native institutions long after these had
disappeared from the wide plains and fertile valleys which
lay on the highroads of war and commerce. Lycia was to
Asia Minor what the highlands of Wales and of Scotland
have been to Britain, the last entrenchments where the old
race stood at bay. And even among the Semites of antiquity,
though father-kin finally prevailed in matters of descent and
property, traces of an older system of mother-kin, with its
looser sexual relations, appear to have long survived in the
sphere of religion. At all events one of the most learned
and acute of Semitic scholars adduced what he regarded as
evidence sufficient to prove <q>that in old Arabian religion
gods and goddesses often occurred in pairs, the goddess
being the greater, so that the god cannot be her Baal, that
the goddess is often a mother without being a wife, and the
god her son, and that the progress of things was towards
changing goddesses into gods or lowering them beneath the
male deity.</q><note place='foot'>W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Kinship and
Marriage in Early Arabia</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1903), p. 306. The hypothesis of the
former existence of mother-kin among
the Semites is rejected by Professor
Ed. Meyer (<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. 2, p. 360) and W. W. Graf Baudissin
(<hi rend='italic'>Adonis und Esmun</hi>, pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Mother-kin
in
ancient
Egypt.</note>
In Egypt the archaic system of mother-kin, with its
preference for women over men in matters of property and
inheritance, lasted down to Roman times, and it was traditionally
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
based on the example of Isis, who had avenged
her husband's murder and had continued to reign after
his decease, conferring benefits on mankind. <q>For these
reasons,</q> says Diodorus Siculus, <q>it was appointed that the
queen should enjoy greater power and honour than the king,
and that among private people the wife should rule over her
husband, in the marriage contract the husband agreeing to
obey his wife in all things.</q><note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 27. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
In spite of this express testimony to
the existence of a true gynaecocracy in
ancient Egypt, I am of opinion that
the alleged superiority of the queen to
the king and of the wife to her husband
must have been to a great extent only
nominal. Certainly we know that it
was the king and not the queen who
really governed the country; and we
can hardly doubt that in like manner
it was for the most part the husband
and not the wife who really ruled the
house, though unquestionably in regard
to property the law seems to have
granted important rights to women
which it denied to men. On the
position of women in ancient Egypt
see especially the able article of Miss
Rachel Evelyn White (Mrs. Wedd),
<q>Women in Ptolemaic Egypt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of Hellenic Studies</hi>, xviii. (1898) pp.
238-256.</note> A corollary of the superior
position thus conceded to women in Egypt was that the
obligation of maintaining parents in their old age rested on
the daughters, not on the sons, of the family.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 35.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Marriages
of brothers
with sisters
in ancient
Egypt.</note>
The same legal superiority of women over men accounts
for the most remarkable feature in the social system of
the ancient Egyptians, to wit, the marriage of full brothers
with full sisters. That marriage, which to us seems strange
and unnatural, was by no means a whim of the reigning
Ptolemies; on the contrary, these Macedonian conquerors
appear, with characteristic prudence, to have borrowed the
custom from their Egyptian predecessors for the express
purpose of conciliating native prejudice. In the eyes of the
Egyptians <q>marriage between brother and sister was the
best of marriages, and it acquired an ineffable degree of
sanctity when the brother and sister who contracted it were
themselves born of a brother and sister, who had in their
turn also sprung from a union of the same sort.</q><note place='foot'>Sir Gaston Maspero, quoted by
Miss R. E. White, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 244.</note> Nor did
the principle apply only to gods and kings. The common
people acted on it in their daily life. They regarded
marriages between brothers and sisters as the most natural
and reasonable of all.<note place='foot'>J. Nietzold, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ehe in Ägypten
zur ptolemäisch-römischen Zeit</hi> (Leipzic,
1903), p. 12.</note> The evidence of legal documents,
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
including marriage contracts, tends to prove that such
unions were the rule, not the exception, in ancient Egypt,
and that they continued to form the majority of marriages
long after the Romans had obtained a firm footing in the
country. As we cannot suppose that Roman influence
was used to promote a custom which must have been
abhorrent to Roman instincts, we may safely assume that
the proportion of brother and sister marriages in Egypt
had been still greater in the days when the country was
free.<note place='foot'>A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Ägypten und ägyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, pp. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
U. Wilcken, <q>Arsinoitische Steuerprofessionen
aus dem Jahre 189 n.
Chr.,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Sitzungsberichte der könig.
Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften
zu Berlin</hi>, 1883, p. 903; J. Nietzold,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Ehe in Ägypten zur ptolemäisch-römischen
Zeit</hi>, pp. 12-14.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Such
marriages
were based
on a wish
to keep the
property in
the family.</note>
It would doubtless be a mistake to treat these marriages
as a relic of savagery, as a survival of a tribal communism
which knew no bar to the intercourse of the sexes. For
such a theory would not explain why union with a sister
was not only allowed, but preferred to all others. The true
motive of that preference was most probably the wish of
brothers to obtain for their own use the family property,
which belonged of right to their sisters, and which otherwise
they would have seen in the enjoyment of strangers, the
husbands of their sisters. This is the system which in
Ceylon is known as <foreign rend='italic'>beena</foreign> marriage. Under it the daughter,
not the son, is the heir. She stays at home, and her husband
comes and lives with her in the house; but her brother goes
away and dwells in his wife's home, inheriting nothing from
his parents.<note place='foot'>J. F. McLennan, <hi rend='italic'>Studies in Ancient
History</hi> (London, 1886), pp. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Among the Kocchs of North-Eastern
India <q>the property of the husband is
made over to the wife; when she dies
it goes to her daughters, and when he
marries he lives with his wife's mother</q>
(R. G. Latham, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Ethnology</hi>,
London, 1859, i. 96).</note> Such a system could not fail in time to prove
irksome. Men would be loth to quit the old home, resign
the ancestral property to a stranger, and go out to seek
their fortune empty-handed in the world. The remedy was
obvious. A man had nothing to do but to marry his sister
himself instead of handing her over to another. Having
done so he stayed at home and enjoyed the family estate in
virtue of his marriage with the heiress. This simple and
perfectly effective expedient for keeping the property in the
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
family most probably explains the custom of brother and
sister marriage in Egypt.<note place='foot'>This is in substance the explanation
which Miss Rachel Evelyn White
(Mrs. Wedd) gives of the Egyptian
custom. See her paper, <q>Women in
Ptolemaic Egypt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic
Studies</hi>, xviii. (1898) p. 265. Similarly
Mr. J. Nietzold observes that <q>economical
considerations, especially in the
case of great landowners, may often have
been the occasion of marriages with
sisters, the intention being in this way
to avoid a division of the property</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Die Ehe in Ägypten</hi>, p. 13). The
same explanation of the custom has
been given by Prof. W. Ridgeway.
See his <q>Supplices of Aeschylus,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Praelections delivered before the Senate
of the University of Cambridge</hi> (Cambridge,
1906), pp. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> I understand
from Professor W. M. Flinders
Petrie that the theory has been a
commonplace with Egyptologists for
many years. McLennan explained the
marriage of brothers and sisters in
royal families as an expedient for shifting
the succession from the female to
the male line; but he did not extend
the theory so as to explain similar marriages
among common people in Egypt,
perhaps because he was not aware of
the facts. See J. F. McLennan, <hi rend='italic'>The
Patriarchal Theory</hi>, edited and completed
by D. McLennan (London,
1885), p. 95.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Thus the
traditional
marriage of
Osiris with
his sister
Isis
reflected a
real social
custom.
The
passing
of the
old world
in Egypt.</note>
Thus the union of Osiris with his sister Isis was not a
freak of the story-teller's fancy: it reflected a social custom
which was itself based on practical considerations of the
most solid kind. When we reflect that this practice of
mother-kin as opposed to father-kin survived down to
the latest times of antiquity, not in an obscure and barbarous
tribe, but in a nation whose immemorial civilization
was its glory and the wonder of the world, we may without
being extravagant suppose that a similar practice formerly
prevailed in Syria and Phrygia, and that it accounts for
the superiority of the goddess over the god in the divine
partnerships of Adonis and Astarte, of Attis and Cybele.
But the ancient system both of society and of religion
had undergone far more change in these countries than
in Egypt, where to the last the main outlines of the old
structure could be traced in the national institutions to
which the Egyptians clung with a passionate, a fanatical
devotion. Mother-kin, the divinity of kings and queens, a
sense of the original connexion of the gods with nature&mdash;these
things outlived the Persian, the Macedonian, the Roman
conquest, and only perished under the more powerful solvent
of Christianity. But the old order did not vanish at once
with the official establishment of the new religion. In the
age of Constantine the Greeks of Egypt still attributed the
rise of the Nile to Serapis, the later form of Osiris, alleging
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
that the inundation could not take place if the standard
cubit, which was used to measure it, were not deposited
according to custom in the temple of the god. The emperor
ordered the cubit to be transferred to a church; and next
year, to the general surprise, the river rose just as usual.<note place='foot'>Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Ecclesiastica</hi>, i.
18 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Graeca</hi>, lxvii.
121). The learned Valesius, in his
note on this passage, informs us that
the cubit was again transferred by the
Emperor Julian to the Serapeum, where
it was left in peace till the destruction
of that temple.</note>
Even at a later time Athanasius himself had to confess with
sorrow and indignation that under his own eyes the Egyptians
still annually mourned the death of Osiris.<note place='foot'>Athanasius, <hi rend='italic'>Oratio contra Gentes</hi>,
10 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Graeca</hi>, xxv.
24).</note> The end came
with the destruction of the great Serapeum at Alexandria,
the last stronghold of the heathen in Egypt. It perished in
a furious and bloody sedition, in which Christians and pagans
seem to have vied with each other in mutual atrocities.
After its fall the temples were levelled with the ground or
converted into churches, and the images of the old gods
went to the melting-pot to be converted into base uses for
the rabble of Alexandria.<note place='foot'>Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Ecclesiastica</hi>, v.
16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia Graeca</hi>,
lxvii. 604 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>); Sozomenus, <hi rend='italic'>Historia
Ecclesiastica</hi>, vii. 15 (Migne's <hi rend='italic'>Patrologia
Graeca</hi>, lxvii. 1152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>). These
events took place under the Emperor
Theodosius in the year 391 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Egyptian
conservatism
partly
an effect of
natural
conditions
and habits
of life.</note>
The singular tenacity with which the Egyptian people
maintained their traditional beliefs and customs for thousands
of years sprang no doubt from the stubborn conservatism
of the national character. Yet that conservatism was itself
in great measure an effect of geographical and climatic
conditions and of the ways of life which they favoured.
Surrounded on every side by deserts or almost harbourless
seas, the Egyptians occupied a position of great natural
strength which for long ages together protected them from
invasion and allowed their native habits to set and harden,
undisturbed by the subversive influence of foreign conquest.
The wonderful regularity of nature in Egypt also conduced
to a corresponding stability in the minds of the people.
Year in, year out, the immutable succession of the seasons
brought with it the same unvarying round of agricultural
toil. What the fathers had done, the sons did in the
same manner at the same season, and so it went on from
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
generation to generation. This monotonous routine is
common indeed to all purely agricultural communities, and
everywhere tends to beget in the husbandman a settled
phlegmatic habit of mind very different from the mobility,
the alertness, the pliability of character which the hazards
and uncertainties of commerce and the sea foster in the
merchant and the sailor. The saturnine temperament of
the farmer is as naturally averse to change as the more
mercurial spirit of the trader and the seaman is predisposed
to it. But the stereotyping of ideas and of customs was
carried further in Egypt than in most lands devoted to
husbandry by reason of the greater uniformity of the
Egyptian seasons and the more complete isolation of
the country.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The old
type of
Osiris
better
preserved
than those
of Adonis
and Attis.</note>
The general effect of these causes was to create a type
of national character which presented many points of resemblance
to that of the Chinese. In both we see the same
inflexible strength of will, the same astonishing industry, the
same strange blend of humanity and savagery, the same
obstinate adherence to tradition, the same pride of race and
of ancient civilization, the same contempt for foreigners as
for upstarts and barbarians, the same patient outward submission
to an alien rule combined with an unshakeable
inward devotion to native ideals. It was this conservative
temper of the people, bred in great measure of the physical
nature of their land, which, so to say, embalmed the memory
of Osiris long after the corresponding figures of Adonis
and Attis had suffered decay. For while Egypt enjoyed
profound repose, the tides of war and conquest, of traffic
and commerce, had for centuries rolled over Western Asia,
the native home of Adonis and Attis; and if the shock
of nationalities in this great meeting-ground of East and
West was favourable to the rise of new faiths and new
moralities, it was in the same measure unfavourable to the
preservation of the old.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Notes.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>I. Moloch The King.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Moloch
perhaps
the human
king
regarded
as an
incarnate
deity.</note>
I cannot leave the evidence for the sacred character of Jewish
kings<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 17 sqq.</note> without mentioning a suggestion which was made to me by
my friend and teacher the Rev. Professor R. H. Kennett. He
thinks that Moloch, to whom first-born children were burnt by their
parents in the valley of Hinnom, outside the walls of Jerusalem,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 168 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
G. F. Moore, in <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Molech.</q> The phrase translated
<q>make pass through the fire to
Molech</q> (2 Kings xxiii. 10) means
properly, Professor Kennett tells me,
<q>make to pass over by means of fire
to Molech,</q> where the verb has the
sense of <q>make over to,</q> <q>dedicate,</q>
<q>devote,</q> as appears from its use in
Exodus xiii. 12 (<q>set apart,</q> English
Version) and Ezekiel xx. 26. That
the children were not made simply to
pass through the fire, but were burned
in it, is shown by a comparison of 2
Kings xvi. 3, xxiii. 10, Jeremiah
xxxii. 35, with 2 Chronicles xxviii. 3,
Jeremiah vii. 31, xix. 5. As to the
use of the verb העכיר in the sense of
<q>dedicate,</q> <q>devote,</q> see G. F.
Moore, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Molech,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Biblica</hi>, iii. 3184; F. Brown, S. R.
Driver, and C. A. Briggs, <hi rend='italic'>Hebrew
and English Lexicon of the Old Testament</hi>
(Oxford, 1906), p. 718. <q>The
testimony of both the prophets and
the laws is abundant and unambiguous
that the victims were slain and burnt
as a holocaust</q> (G. F. Moore, in
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, iii. 3184).
Similarly Principal J. Skinner translates
the phrase in 2 Kings xvi. 3 by
<q>dedicated his son by fire,</q> and remarks
that the expression, <q>whatever
its primary sense may be, undoubtedly
denoted actual burning</q> (commentary
on Kings in <hi rend='italic'>The Century Bible</hi>).
The practice would seem to have been
very ancient at Jerusalem, for tradition
placed the attempted burnt-sacrifice of
Isaac by his father Abraham on Mount
Moriah, which was no other than
Mount Zion, the site of the king's
palace and of the temple of Jehovah.
See Genesis xxii. 1-18; 2 Chronicles
iii. 1; J. Benzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Hebräische Archäologie</hi>
(Freiburg i. Baden and Leipsic,
1894), pp. 45, 233; T. K. Cheyne,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Moriah,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>,
iii. 3200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
may have been originally the human king regarded as an incarnate
deity. Certainly the name of Moloch, or rather Molech (for so it
is always written in the Massoretic text<note place='foot'>Leviticus xviii. 21, xx. 2-5; 1
Kings xi. 7; 2 Kings xxiii. 10;
Jeremiah xxxii. 35.</note>), is merely a slightly disguised
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
form of <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>melech</foreign>, the ordinary Hebrew word for <q>king,</q> the
scribes having apparently given the dreadful word the vowels of
bosheth, <q>shameful thing.</q><note place='foot'>W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion
of the Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 372, note 1.</note> But it seems clear that in historical
times the Jews who offered these sacrifices identified Molech, not
with the human king, but with Jehovah, though the prophets
protested against the custom as an outrage on the divine
majesty.<note place='foot'><q>It is plain, from various passages
of the prophets, that the sacrifices of
children among the Jews before the
captivity, which are commonly known
as sacrifices to Moloch, were regarded
by the worshippers as oblations to
Jehovah, under the title of king</q>
(W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
Semites</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 372, referring to Jeremiah
vii. 31, xix. 5, xxxii. 35; Ezekiel
xxiii. 39; Micah vi. 7). The same
view is taken by Prof. G. F. Moore,
in <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia Biblica</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Molech,</q>
vol. iii. 3187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
sacrifices to
Moloch
may have
been intended
to
prolong the
king's life.
Vicarious
sacrifices
for a king
or queen
in Sweden,
Persia, and
Madagascar.</note>
If, however, these sacrifices were originally offered to or in behalf
of the human king, it is possible that they were intended to
prolong his life and strengthen his hands for the performance of
those magical functions which he was expected to discharge for the
good of his people. The old kings of Sweden answered with their
heads for the fertility of the ground,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, i. 366 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and we read that one of them,
Aun or On by name, sacrificed nine of his sons to Odin at Upsala
in order that his own life might be spared. After the sacrifice of
his second son he received from the god an oracle that he should
live as long as he gave him one of his sons every tenth year. When
he had thus sacrificed seven sons, the ruthless father still lived, but
was so feeble that he could no longer walk and had to be carried
in a chair. Then he offered up his eighth son and lived ten years
more, bedridden. After that he sacrificed his ninth son, and lived
ten years more, drinking out of a horn like a weaned child. He
now wished to sacrifice his last remaining son to Odin, but the
Swedes would not let him, so he died and was buried in a mound
at Upsala.<note place='foot'><q>Ynglinga Saga,</q> 29, in <hi rend='italic'>The
Heimskringla or Chronicle of the Kings
of Norway</hi>, translated by S. Laing
(London, 1844), i. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. M.
Chadwick, <hi rend='italic'>The Cult of Othin</hi> (London,
1899), pp. 4, 27; <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>,
pp. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Similarly in Peru, when
a person of note was sick, he would
sometimes sacrifice his son to the idol
in order that his own life might be
spared. See A. de Herrera, <hi rend='italic'>The
General History of the Vast Continent
and Islands of America</hi>, translated by
Capt. J. Stevens (London, 1725-1726),
iv. 347 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this Swedish tradition the king's children seem
to have been looked upon as substitutes offered to the god in
place of their father, and apparently this was also the current explanation
of the slaughter of the first-born in the later times of Israel.<note place='foot'>Micah vi. 6-8.</note>
On that view the sacrifices were vicarious, and therefore purely
religious, being intended to propitiate a stern and exacting deity.
Similarly we read that when Amestris, wife of Xerxes, was grown
old, she sacrificed on her behalf twice seven noble children to the
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
earth god by burying them alive.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, vii. 114; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>De superstitione</hi>, 13.</note> If the story is true&mdash;and it rests
on the authority of Herodotus, a nearly contemporary witness&mdash;we
may surmise that the aged queen acted thus with an eye to the
future rather than to the past; she hoped that the grim god of
the nether-world would accept the young victims in her stead, and
let her live for many years. The same idea of vicarious suffering
comes out in a tradition told of a certain Hova king of Madagascar,
who bore the sonorous name of Andriamasinavalona. When he had
grown sickly and feeble, the oracle was consulted as to the best way
of restoring him to health. <q>The following result was the consequence
of the directions of the oracle. A speech was first delivered
to the people, offering great honours and rewards to the family of
any individual who would freely offer himself to be sacrificed, in
order to the king's recovery. The people shuddered at the idea,
and ran away in different directions. One man, however, presented
himself for the purpose, and his offer was accepted. The sacrificer
girded up his loins, sharpened his knife, and bound the victim.
After which, he was laid down with his head towards the east, upon
a mat spread for the purpose, according to the custom with animals
on such occasions, when the priest appeared, to proceed with all
solemnity in slaughtering the victim by cutting his throat. A
quantity of red liquid, however, which had been prepared from a
native dye, was spilled in the ceremony; and, to the amazement
of those who looked on, blood seemed to be flowing all around. The
man, as might be supposed, was unhurt; but the king rewarded him
and his descendants with the perpetual privilege of exemption from
capital punishment for any violation of the laws. The descendants
of the man to this day form a particular class, called <foreign rend='italic'>Tay maty
manota</foreign>, which may be translated, <q>Not dead, though transgressing.</q>
Instances frequently occur, of individuals of this class appropriating
bullocks, rice, and other things belonging to the sovereign, as if
they were their own, and escaping merely with a reprimand, while
a common person would have to suffer death, or be reduced to
slavery.</q><note place='foot'>W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History of Madagascar</hi>
(London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), i. 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other sacrifices
for
prolonging
the king's
life appear
to be
magical
rather than
religious. Custom in
the Niger
delta.</note>
Sometimes, however, the practices intended to prolong the king's
life seem to rest on a theory of nutrition rather than of substitution;
in other words, the life of the victims, instead of being offered
vicariously to a god, is apparently supposed to pass directly into the
body of the sacrificer, thus refreshing his failing strength and prolonging
his existence. So regarded, the custom is magical rather
than religious in character, since the desired effect is thought to
follow directly without the intervention of a deity. At all events, it
can be shown that sacrifices of this sort have been offered to prolong
the life of kings in other parts of the world. Thus in regard to
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
some of the negroes who inhabit the delta of the Niger we read
that: <q>A custom which formerly was practised by the Ibani, and is
still prevalent among all the interior tribes, consists in prolonging
the life of a king or ancestral representative by the daily, or possibly
weekly, sacrifice of a chicken and egg. Every morning, as soon as
the patriarch has risen from his bed, the sacrificial articles are procured
either by his mother, head wife, or eldest daughter, and given
to the priest, who receives them on the open space in front of the
house. When this has been reported to the patriarch, he comes
outside and, sitting down, joins in the ceremony. Taking the
chicken in his hand, the priest first of all touches the patriarch's
face with it, and afterwards passes it over the whole of his body.
He then cuts its throat and allows the blood to drop on the ground.
Mixing the blood and the earth into a paste, he rubs it on the old
man's forehead and breast, and this is not to be washed off under
any circumstances until the evening. The chicken and the egg,
also a piece of white cloth, are now tied on to a stick, which, if a
stream is in the near vicinity, is planted in the ground at the water-side.
During the carriage of these articles to the place in question,
all the wives and many members of the household accompany the
priest, invoking the deity as they go to prolong their father's life.
This is done in the firm conviction that through the sacrifice of
each chicken his life will be accordingly prolonged.</q><note place='foot'>Major A. G. Leonard, <hi rend='italic'>The Lower
Niger and its Tribes</hi> (London, 1906),
p. 457.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Customs
observed
by the
Zulus and
Caffres to
prolong the
king's life.</note>
The ceremony thus described is, like so many other rites, a
combination of magic and religion; for whereas the prayers to the
god are religious, the passing of the victim over the king's body and
the smearing of him with its blood are magical, being plainly intended
to convey to him directly, without the mediation of any
deity, the life of the fowl. In the following instances the practices
for prolonging the king's life seem to be purely magical. Among
the Zulus, at one of the annual feasts of first-fruits, a bull is killed
by a particular regiment. In slaughtering the beast they may not
use spears or sticks, but must break its neck or choke it with their
bare hands. <q>It is then burned, and the strength of the bull is
supposed to enter into the king, thereby prolonging his life.</q><note place='foot'>D. Leslie, <hi rend='italic'>Among the Zulus and
Amatongas</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Edinburgh, 1875), p. 91.
This sacrifice may be the one described
by J. Shooter, <hi rend='italic'>The Kafirs of Natal</hi>
(London, 1857), p. 26. The reason
for not stabbing the animal is perhaps
a wish not to lose any of the blood,
but to convey its life intact to the
king. The same reason would explain
the same rule which the Baganda
observed in killing a human victim for
the same purpose (see below, p. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>).</note> Again,
in an early Portuguese historian we read of a Caffre king of East
Africa that <q>it is related of this Monomotapa that he has a house
where he commands bodies of men who have died at the hands of
the law to be hung up, and where thus hanging all the humidity
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
of their bodies falls into vases placed underneath, and when all
has dropped from them and they shrink and dry up he commands
them to be taken down and buried, and with the fat and moisture
in the vases they say he makes ointments with which he anoints
himself in order to enjoy long life&mdash;which is his belief&mdash;and also to
be proof against receiving harm from sorcerers.</q><note place='foot'>J. Dos Santos, <hi rend='italic'>Eastern Ethiopia</hi>,
bk. ii. chap. 16 (G. M'Call Theal's
<hi rend='italic'>Records of South-Eastern Africa</hi>, vii.
289).</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Customs
observed
by the
Baganda
to prolong
the king's
life.
Human
victims
killed in
order to
invigorate
the king.</note>
The Baganda of Central Africa used to kill men on various
occasions for the purpose of prolonging the king's life; in all cases
it would seem to be thought that the life of the murdered man
was in some mysterious fashion transferred to the king, so that
the monarch received thereby a fresh accession of vital energy.
For example, whenever a particular royal drum had a new skin
put on it, not only was a cow killed to furnish the skin and its
blood run into the drum, but a man was beheaded and the spouting
blood from the severed neck was allowed to gush into the drum,
<q>so that, when the drum was beaten, it was supposed to add fresh
life and vigour to the king from the life of the slain man.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), pp. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Again, at the coronation of a new king, a royal chamberlain was
chosen to take charge of the king's inner court and to guard his
wives. From the royal presence the chamberlain was conducted,
along with eight captives, to one of the human shambles; there
he was blindfolded while seven of the men were clubbed to death,
only the dull thud and crashing sound telling him of what was
taking place. But when the seven had been thus despatched,
the bandages were removed from the chamberlain's eyes and he
witnessed the death of the eighth. As each man was killed, his
belly was ripped open and his bowels pulled out and hung round
the chamberlain's neck. These deaths were said to add to the
King's vigour and to make the chamberlain strong and faithful.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
p. 200.</note>
Nor were these the only human sacrifices offered at a king's
coronation for the purpose of strengthening the new monarch.
When the king had reigned two or three months, he was expected
to hunt first a leopard and then a bushbuck. On the night after
the hunt of the bushbuck, one of the ministers of State caught
a man and brought him before the king in the dark; the king
speared him slightly, then the man was strangled and the body
thrown into a papyrus swamp, that it might never be found again.
Another ceremony performed about this time to confirm the king
in his kingdom was to catch a man, bind him, and bring him
before the king, who wounded him slightly with a spear. Then
the man was put to death. These men were killed to invigorate
the king.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Chief's son
killed to
provide the
king with
anklets.</note>
When a king of Uganda had reigned some time, apparently
several years, a ceremony was performed for the sake of prolonging
his life. For this purpose the king paid a visit&mdash;a fatal visit&mdash;to
a chief of the Lung-fish clan, who bore the title of Nankere
and resided in the district of Busiro, where the tombs and temples
of the kings were situated. When the time for the ceremony had
been appointed, the chief chose one of his own sons, who was
to die that the king might live. If the chief had no son, a near
relation was compelled to serve as a substitute. The hapless youth
was fed and clothed and treated in all respects like a prince,
and taken to live in a particular house near the place where the
king was to lodge for the ceremony. When the destined victim
had been feasted and guarded for a month, the king set out on
his progress from the capital. On the way he stopped at the
temple of the great god Mukasa; there he changed his garments,
leaving behind him in the temple those which he had been wearing.
Also he left behind him all his anklets, and did not put on any
fresh ones, for he was shortly to receive new anklets of a remarkable
kind. When the king arrived at his destination, the chief
met him, and the two exchanged a gourd of beer. At this interview
the king's mother was present to see her son for the last
time; for from that moment the two were never allowed to look
upon each other again. The chief addressed the king's mother
informing her of this final separation; then turning to the king
he said, <q>You are now of age; go and live longer than your
forefathers.</q> Then the chief's son was introduced. The chief
took him by the hand and presented him to the king, who
passed him on to the body-guard; they led him outside and
killed him by beating him with their clenched fists. The muscles
from the back of the body of the murdered youth were removed
and made into two anklets for the king, and a strip of skin
cut from the corpse was made into a whip, which was kept
in the royal enclosure for special feasts. The dead body was
thrown on waste land and guarded against wild beasts, but not
buried.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>, pp. 210 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The king's
game.</note>
When that ceremony was over, the king departed to go to
another chief in Busiro; but on the way thither he stopped at
a place called Baka and sat down under a great tree to play a
game of spinning fruit-stones. It is a children's game, but it was
no child's play to the man who ran to fetch the fruit-stones for
the king to play with; for he was caught and speared to death
on the spot for the purpose of prolonging the king's life. After
the game had been played the king with his train passed on and
lodged with a certain princess till the anklets made from the
muscles of the chief's murdered son were ready for him to wear;
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
it was the princess who had to superintend the making of these
royal ornaments.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>,
pp. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> I have abridged the
account of the ceremonies.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The whip
of human
skin.</note>
When all these ceremonies were over, the king made a great
feast. At this feast a priest went about carrying under his mantle
the whip that had been made from the skin of the murdered
young man. As he passed through the crowd of merrymakers,
he would flick a man here and there with the whip, and it was
believed that the man on whom the lash lighted would be childless
and might die, unless he made an offering of either nine or
ninety cowrie shells to the priest who had struck him. Naturally
he hastened to procure the shells and take them to the striker,
who, on receiving them, struck the man on the shoulder with his
hand, thus restoring to him the generative powers of which the
blow of the whip had deprived him. At the end of the feast
the drummers removed all the drums but one, which they left
as if they had forgotten it. Somebody in the crowd would
notice the apparent oversight and run after the drummers with
the drum, saying, <q>You have left one behind.</q> The thanks he
received was that he was caught and killed and the bones of his
upper arm made into drumsticks for that particular drum. The
drum was never afterwards brought out during the whole of the
king's reign, but was kept covered up till the time came to bring
it out on the corresponding feast of his successor. Yet from time
to time the priest, who had flicked the revellers with the whip
of human skin, would dress himself up in a mantle of cow-hide
from neck to foot, and concealing the drumstick of human bones
under his robe would go into the king's presence, and suddenly
whipping out the bones from his bosom would brandish them
in the king's face. Then he would as suddenly hide them again,
but only to repeat the manoeuvre. After that he retired and
restored the bones to their usual place. They were decorated
with cowrie shells and little bells, which jingled as he shook them
at the king.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Modes in
which the
strength of
the human
victims was
thought to
pass into
the king.</note>
The precise meaning of these latter ceremonies is obscure; but
we may suppose that just as the human blood poured into a drum
was thought to pass into the king's veins in the booming notes of
the drum, so the clicking of the human bones and the jingling of
their bells were supposed to infuse into the royal person the vigour
of the murdered man. The purpose of flicking commoners with the
whip made of human skin is even more obscure; but we may
conjecture that the life or virility of every man struck with the whip
was supposed to be transmitted in some way to the king, who thus
recruited his vital, and especially his reproductive, energies at this
solemn feast. If I am right in my interpretation, all these Baganda
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
modes of strengthening the king and prolonging his life belonged to
the nutritive rather than to the vicarious type of sacrifice, from
which it will follow that they were magical rather than religious in
character.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Massacres
perpetrated
when a
king of
Uganda
was ill.</note>
The same thing may perhaps be said of the wholesale massacres
which used to be perpetrated when a king of Uganda was ill. At
these times the priests informed the royal patient that persons
marked by a certain physical peculiarity, such as a cast of the eye,
a particular gait, or a distinctive colouring, must be put to death.
Accordingly the king sent out his catchpoles, who waylaid such
persons in the roads and dragged them to the royal enclosure, where
they were kept until the tale of victims prescribed by the priest was
complete. Before they were led away to one of the eight places of
execution, which were regularly appointed for this purpose in different
parts of the kingdom, the victims had to drink medicated beer with
the king out of a special pot, in order that he might have power
over their ghosts, lest they should afterwards come back to torment
him. They were killed, sometimes by being speared to death,
sometimes by being hacked to pieces, sometimes by being burned
alive. Contrary to the usual custom of the Baganda, the bodies, or
what remained of the bodies, of these unfortunates were always left
unburied on the place of execution.<note place='foot'>From information furnished by my
friend the Rev. J. Roscoe. Compare
his book, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>, pp. 331 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In what way precisely the
sick king was supposed to benefit by these massacres of his subjects
does not appear, but we may surmise that somehow the victims
were believed to give their lives for him or to him.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Yet the
sacrifices
of children
to Moloch
may be
otherwise
explained.</note>
Thus it is possible that in Israel also the sacrifices of children
to Moloch were in like manner intended to prolong the life of the
human king (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>melech</foreign>) either by serving as substitutes for him or by
recruiting his failing energies with their vigorous young life. But it
is equally possible, and perhaps more probable, that the sacrifice
of the first-born children was only a particular application of the
ancient law which devoted to the deity the first-born of every womb,
whether of cattle or of human beings.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>II. The Widowed Flamen.</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Pollution of Death.'/>
<head>§ 1. The Pollution of Death.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Theory
that the
resignation
of the
widowed
Flamen
Dialis was
caused
by the
pollution
of death.</note>
A different explanation of the rule which obliged the Flamen
Dialis to resign the priesthood on the death of his wife<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 45.</note> has been
suggested by my friend Dr. L. R. Farnell. He supposes that such
a bereavement would render the Flamen ceremonially impure, and
therefore unfit to hold office.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Hibbert Journal</hi>, April 1907,
p. 689.</note> It is true that the ceremonial pollution
caused by death commonly disqualifies a man for the discharge
of sacred functions, but as a rule the disqualification is only temporary
and can be removed by seclusion and the observance of
purificatory rites, the length of the seclusion and the nature of the
purification varying with the degree of relationship in which the living
stand to the dead. Thus, for example, if one of the sacred eunuchs
at Hierapolis-Bambyce saw the dead body of a stranger, he was unclean
for that day and might not enter the sanctuary of the goddess;
but next day after purifying himself he was free to enter. But if the
corpse happened to be that of a relation he was unclean for thirty
days and had to shave his head before he might set foot within the
holy precinct.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 53.</note> Again, in the Greek island of Ceos persons who had
offered the annual sacrifices to their departed friends were unclean
for two days afterwards and might not enter a sanctuary; they had
to purify themselves with water.<note place='foot'>G. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> vol. ii. pp. 725
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, Nos. 877, 878.</note> Similarly no one might go into
the shrine of Men Tyrannus for ten days after being in contact with
the dead.<note place='foot'>G. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> vol. ii.
pp. 429 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 633.</note> Once more, at Stratonicea in Caria a chorus of thirty
noble boys, clad in white and holding branches in their hands,
used to sing a hymn daily in honour of Zeus and Hecate; but if
one of them were sick or had suffered a domestic bereavement, he
was for the time being excused, not permanently excluded, from the
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
performance of his sacred duties.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum</hi>,
ed. Aug. Boeckh, etc. (Berlin, 1828-1877),
vol. ii. pp. 481 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No. 2715,
οὔσης ἐξουσίας το[ῖς παισίν, ἐά]ν τινες
αὐτῶν μὴ ὦσιν ὑγιεῖς ἤ πένθει οἰκείῳ
κατέχωνται, where I understand ἐξουσία
to mean <q>leave of absence.</q></note> On the analogy of these and
similar cases we should expect to find the widowed Flamen temporarily
debarred from the exercise of his office, not permanently
relieved of it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Apparent
parallel
among the
Todas.</note>
However, in support of Dr. Farnell's view I would cite an
Indian parallel which was pointed out to me by Dr. W. H. R.
Rivers. Among the Todas of the Neilgherry Hills in Southern India
the priestly dairyman (<foreign rend='italic'>palol</foreign>) is a sacred personage, and his life, like
that of the Flamen Dialis, is hedged in by many taboos. Now
when a death occurs in his clan, the dairyman may not attend any
of the funeral ceremonies unless he gives up office, but he may be
re-elected after the second funeral ceremonies have been completed.
In the interval his place must be taken by a man of another clan.
Some eighteen or nineteen years ago a man named Karkievan
resigned the office of dairyman when his wife died, but two years
later he was re-elected and has held office ever since. There have
meantime been many deaths in his clan, but he has not attended
a funeral, and has not therefore had to resign his post again.
Apparently in old times a more stringent rule prevailed, and the
dairyman was obliged to vacate office whenever a death occurred in
his clan. For, according to tradition, the clan of Keadrol was
divided into its two existing divisions for the express purpose of
ensuring that there might still be men to undertake the office of
dairyman when a death occurred in the clan, the men of the one
division taking office whenever there was a death in the other.<note place='foot'>W. H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi>
(London, 1906), pp. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
At first sight this case may seem exactly parallel to the case of
the Flamen Dialis and the Flaminica on Dr. Farnell's theory; for
here there can be no doubt whatever that it is the pollution of death
which disqualifies the sacred dairyman from holding office, since, if
he only avoids that pollution by not attending the funeral, he is
allowed at the present day to retain his post. On this analogy we
might suppose that it was not so much the death of his wife as the
attendance at her funeral which compelled the Flamen Dialis to
resign, especially as we know that he was expressly forbidden to
touch a dead body or to enter the place where corpses were
burned.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 24.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But on
inspection
the analogy
breaks
down.</note>
But a closer inspection of the facts proves that the analogy
breaks down at some important points. For though the Flamen
Dialis was forbidden to touch a dead body or to enter a place where
corpses were burned, he was permitted to attend a funeral;<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>funus tamen
exequi non est religio.</foreign></q></note> so that
there could hardly be any objection to his attending the funeral of
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
his wife. This permission clearly tells against the view that it was
the mere pollution of death which obliged him to resign office when
his wife died. Further, and this is a point of fundamental difference
between the two cases, whereas the Flamen Dialis was bound to be
married, and married too by a rite of special solemnity,<note place='foot'>Gaius, <hi rend='italic'>Instit.</hi> i. 112, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quod jus
etiam nostris temporibus in usu est:
nam flamines majores, id est Diales,
Martiales, Quirinales, item reges sacrorum,
nisi</foreign> (qui) <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex farreatis nati</foreign> sunt
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non leguntur: ac ne ipsi quidem sine
confarreatione sacerdotium habere possunt</foreign></q>;
Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 103,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quae res ad farreatas nuptias pertinet,
quibus flaminem et flaminicam jure
pontificio in matrimonium necesse est
convenire</foreign>.</q> For a fuller description
of the rite see Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi>
iv. 374. From the testimony of Gaius
it appears that not only the Flamen
Dialis but all the other principal
Flamens were bound to be married.
However, the text of Gaius in this
passage is somewhat uncertain. I have
quoted it from P. E. Huschke's third
edition (Leipsic, 1878).</note> there is no
such obligation on the sacred dairyman of the Todas; indeed, if he is
married, he is bound to live apart from his wife during his term of
office.<note place='foot'>W. H. R. Rivers, <hi rend='italic'>The Todas</hi>, p.
99. According to an old account,
there was an important exception to
the rule, but Dr. Rivers was not able
to verify it; he understood that during
the tenure of his office the dairyman is
really celibate.</note> Surely the obligation laid on the Flamen Dialis to be
married of itself implies that with the death of his wife he necessarily
ceased to hold office: there is no need to search for another
reason in the pollution of death which, as I have just shown, does not
seem to square with the permission granted to the Flamen to attend
a funeral. That this is indeed the true explanation of the rule in
question is strongly suggested by the further and apparently parallel
rule which forbade the Flamen to divorce his wife; nothing but
death might part them.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 23, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Matrimonium
flaminis nisi morte dirimi jus
non est</foreign></q>; Festus, p. 89, ed. C. O.
Müller, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Flammeo</q>; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Romanae</hi>, 50. Plutarch
mentions as an illegal exception that
in his own time the Emperor Domitian
allowed a Flamen to divorce his wife,
but the ceremony of the divorce was
attended by <q>many awful, strange,
and gloomy rites</q> performed by the
priests.</note> Now the rule which enjoined that a
Flamen must be married, and the rule which forbade him to divorce
his wife, have obviously nothing to do with the pollution of death,
yet they can hardly be separated from the other rule that with the
death of his wife he vacated office. All three rules are explained in
the most natural way on the hypothesis which I have adopted,
namely, that this married priest and priestess had to perform in
common certain rites which the husband could not perform without
his wife. The same obvious solution of the problem was suggested
long ago by Plutarch, who, after asking why the Flamen Dialis had
to lay down office on the death of his wife, says, amongst other
things, that <q>perhaps it is because she performs sacred rites along
with him (for many of the rites may not be performed without the
presence of a married woman), and to marry another wife immediately
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
on the death of the first would hardly be possible or decent.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Romanae</hi>, 50.
That the wives of Roman priests aided
their husbands in the performance of
sacred rites is mentioned by Dionysius
of Halicarnassus, who attributes the
institution of these joint priesthoods
to Romulus (<hi rend='italic'>Antiquit. Rom.</hi> ii. 22).</note>
This simple explanation of the rule seems quite sufficient, and it
would clearly hold good whether I am right or wrong in further supposing
that the human husband and wife in this case represented a
divine husband and wife, a god and goddess, to wit Jupiter and
Juno, or rather Dianus (Janus) and Diana;<note place='foot'>The epithet Dialis, which was
applied to the Flaminica as well as to
the Flamen (Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 26;
Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 137),
would of itself prove that husband and
wife served the same god or pair of
gods; and while the word was doubtfully
derived by Varro from Jove (<hi rend='italic'>De
lingua Latina</hi>, v. 84), we are expressly
told that the Flamen was the priest
and the Flaminica the priestess of that
god (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 109;
Festus, p. 92, ed. C. O. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Flammeo</q>). There is therefore
every reason to accept the statement of
Plutarch (<hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 86) that the
Flaminica was reputed to be sacred to
Juno, the divine partner of Jupiter, in
spite of the objections raised by Mr. W.
Warde Fowler (<q>Was the Flaminica
Dialis priestess of Juno?</q> <hi rend='italic'>Classical
Review</hi>, ix. (1895) pp. 474 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note> and that supposition
in its turn might still hold good even if I were wrong in further conjecturing
that of this divine pair the goddess (Juno or rather Diana)
was originally the more important partner.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Customs of
the Kota
and Jewish
priests.</note>
However it is to be explained, the Roman rule which forbade the
Flamen Dialis to be a widower has its parallel among the Kotas, a
tribe who, like the Todas, inhabit the Neilgherry Hills of Southern
India. For the higher Kota priests are not allowed to be
widowers; if a priest's wife dies while he is in office, his appointment
lapses. At the same time priests <q>should avoid pollution,
and may not attend a Toda or Badaga funeral, or approach the
seclusion hut set apart for Kota women.</q><note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Castes and Tribes
of Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1909), iv.
10.</note> Jewish priests were
specially permitted to contract the pollution of death for near relations,
among whom father, mother, son, daughter, and unmarried
sister are particularly enumerated; but they were forbidden to contract
the pollution for strangers. However, among the relations for
whom a priest might thus defile himself a wife is not mentioned.<note place='foot'>Leviticus, xxi. 1-3; Ezekiel, xliv.
25.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The Marriage of the Roman Gods.'/>
<head>§ 2. The Marriage of the Roman Gods.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The theory
that the
Roman
gods were
celibate is
contradicted
by
Varro and
Seneca.</note>
The theory that the Flamen Dialis and his wife personated a
divine couple, whether Jupiter and Juno or Dianus (Janus) and
Diana, supposes a married relation between the god and goddess,
and so far it would certainly be untenable if Dr. Farnell were right
in assuming, on the authority of Mr. W. Warde Fowler, that the
Roman gods were celibate.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Hibbert Journal</hi>, iv. (1906)
p. 932.</note> On that subject, however, Varro, the
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
most learned of Roman antiquaries, was of a contrary opinion. He
not only spoke particularly of Juno as the wife of Jupiter,<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua Latina</hi>, v. 67,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod Jovis Juno conjux et is caelum.</foreign></q></note> but he also
affirmed generally, in the most unambiguous language, that the old
Roman gods were married, and in saying so he referred not to the
religion of his own day, which had been modified by Greek influence,
but to the religion of the ancient Romans, his ancestors.<note place='foot'>Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, iv.
32, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dicit etiam [scil. Varro] de
generationibus deorum magis ad poetas
quam ad physicos fuisse populos inclinatos,
et ideo et sexum et generationes
deorum majores suos, id est veteres
credidisse Romanos et eorum constituisse
conjugia.</foreign></q></note> Seneca
ridiculed the marriage of the Roman gods, citing as examples the
marriages of Mars and Bellona, of Vulcan and Venus, of Neptune
and Salacia, and adding sarcastically that some of the goddesses were
spinsters or widows, such as Populonia, Fulgora, and Rumina, whose
faded charms or unamiable character had failed to attract a suitor.<note place='foot'>Seneca, quoted by Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De
civitate Dei</hi>, vi. 10, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid quod et
matrimonia, inquit, deorum jungimus,
et ne pie quidem, fratrum ac sororum?
Bellonam Marti conlocamus, Vulcano
Venerem, Neptuno Salaciam. Quosdam
tamen caelibes relinquimus, quasi condicio
defecerit, praesertim cum quaedam
viduae sint, ut Populonia vel Fulgora
et diva Rumina; quibus non miror
petitorem defuisse.</foreign></q> In this passage
the marriage of Venus to Vulcan is
probably Greek; all the rest is pure
Roman.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
marriage
of Orcus.</note>
Again, the learned Servius, whose commentary on Virgil is a
gold mine of Roman religious lore, informs us that the pontiffs
celebrated the marriage of the infernal deity Orcus with very great
solemnity;<note place='foot'>Servius, on Virgil, Georg. i. 344,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Aliud est sacrum, aliud nuptias
Cereri celebrare, in quibus re vera
vinum adhiberi nefas fuerat, quae Orci
nuptiae dicebantur, quas praesentia
sua pontifices ingenti solemnitate celebrabant.</foreign></q></note> and for this statement he would seem to have had the
authority of the pontifical books themselves, for he refers to them
in the same connexion only a few lines before. As it is in the
highest degree unlikely that the pontiffs would solemnize any foreign
rites, we may safely assume that the marriage of Orcus was not
borrowed from Greek mythology, but was a genuine old Roman
ceremony, and this is all the more probable because Servius, our
authority for the custom, has recorded some curious and obviously
ancient taboos which were observed at the marriage and in the
ritual of Ceres, the goddess who seems to have been joined in
wedlock to Orcus. One of these taboos forbade the use of wine,
the other forbade persons to name their father or daughter.<note place='foot'>Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 344,
and on <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 58. As to the prohibition
of wine, compare Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> iii. 11. There seems to be
no doubt that Orcus was a genuine old
Italian god of death and the dead.
See the evidence collected by R. Peter,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Orcus,</q> in W. H. Roscher's
<hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>,
iii. 940 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, who says that <q>Orcus
was obviously one of those old Roman
gods who occupied the thoughts of the
people in the most lively manner.</q> On
the other hand, Prof. G. Wissowa supposes
that Orcus is merely a borrowed
form of the Greek Horkos (<hi rend='italic'>Religion und
Kultus der Römer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 310). But Horkos
was not a god of death and the dead;
he was simply a personified oath (ὅρκος;
see Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Works and Days</hi>, 804
Ὅρκον γεινόμενον, τὸν Ἔρις τέκε πῆμ᾽
ἐπιόρκοις), an abstract idea which
makes no figure in Greek mythology
and religion. That such a rare and
thin Greek abstraction should through
a gross misunderstanding be transformed
into a highly popular Roman
god of death, who not only passed
muster with the people but was admitted
by the pontiffs themselves to
the national pantheon and honoured
by them with a solemn ritual, is in the
last degree improbable.</note>
</p>

<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Evidence
of Aulus
Gellius as
to the
marriage
of the
Roman
gods. Paternity
and
maternity
of Roman
deities.</note>
Further, the learned Roman antiquary Aulus Gellius quotes
from <q>the books of the priests of the Roman people</q> (the highest
possible authority on the subject) and from <q>many ancient speeches</q>
a list of old Roman deities, in which there seem to be at least five
pairs of males and females.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, xiii. 23 (22), 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Conprecationes deum inmortalium,
quae ritu Romano fiunt, expositae sunt
in libris sacerdotum populi Romani et
in plerisque antiquis orationibus. In
his scribtum est: Luam Saturni,
Salaciam Neptuni, Horam Quirini,
Virites Quirini, Maiam Volcani,
Heriem Junonis, Moles Martis Nerienemque
Martis.</foreign></q> As to this list see
Mr. W. Warde Fowler, <hi rend='italic'>Roman Festivals
of the Period of the Republic</hi>
(London, 1899), pp. 60-62; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Religious Experience of the Roman
People</hi> (London, 1911), pp. 150 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>,
481 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> He holds (p. 485) that the
feminine names Salacia, etc., do not
designate goddesses, the wives of the
gods, but that they <q>indicate functions
or attributes of the male deity to whom
they are attached.</q></note> More than that he proves conclusively
by quotations from Plautus, the annalist Cn. Gellius, and Licinius
Imbrex that these old writers certainly regarded one at least of the
pairs (Mars and Nerio) as husband and wife;<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, xiii. 23 (22), 11-16.</note> and we have good
ancient evidence for viewing in the same light three others of the
pairs. Thus the old annalist and antiquarian L. Cincius Alimentus,
who fought against Hannibal and was captured by him, affirmed in
his work on the Roman calendar that Maia was the wife of Vulcan;<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 18,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cingius mensem [Maium] nominatum
putat a Maia, quam Vulcani dicit
uxorem, argumentoque utitur quod
flamen Vulcanalis Kalendis Maiis
huic deae rem divinam facit: sed Piso
uxorem Vulcani Majestam, non Maiam,
dicit vocari.</foreign></q> The work of Cincius
(Cingius) is mentioned by Macrobius
in the same chapter (§ 12, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cingius
in eo libro quem de fastis reliquit</foreign></q>).
As to the life and writings of this old
annalist and antiquary see M. Schanz,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der römischen Litteratur</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
i. (Munich, 1898), p. 128; G.
Wissowa, Münzer, and Cichorius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Cincius,</q> in Pauly-Wissowa's <hi rend='italic'>Realencyclopädie
der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
iii. 2555 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> All these
writers distinguish the old annalist
from the antiquary, whom they take to
have been a later writer of the same
name. But the distinction appears to
be purely arbitrary and destitute of any
ancient authority.</note>
and as there was a Flamen of Vulcan, who sacrificed to Maia on
May Day,<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 18.
See the preceding note.</note> it is reasonable to suppose that he was assisted in the
ceremony by a Flaminica, his wife, just as on my hypothesis the
Flamen Dialis was assisted by his wife the Flaminica. Another old
Roman historian, L. Calpurnius Piso, who wrote in the second
century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi>, said that the name of Vulcan's wife was not Maia but
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
Majestas.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 18. See
the passage cited above, p. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>, note 3.</note> In saying so he may have intended to correct what he
believed to be a mistake of his predecessor L. Cincius. Again,
that Salacia was the wife of Neptune is perhaps implied by Varro,<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De lingua Latina</hi>, v. 72,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Salacia Neptuni a salo</foreign>.</q> This was
probably one of the cases which Varro
had in his mind when he stated that
the ancient Roman gods were married.</note>
and is positively affirmed by Seneca, Augustine, and Servius.<note place='foot'>Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De civitate Dei</hi>, vii.
22, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Jam utique habebat Salaciam
Neptunus uxorem</foreign></q>; Servius, on Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> x. 76, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sane hanc Veniliam
quidam Salaciam accipiunt, Neptuni
uxorem</foreign>.</q> As for Seneca's evidence
see above, p. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, note 3.</note> Again,
Ennius appears to have regarded Hora as the wife of Quirinus, for
in the first book of his Annals he declared his devotion to that
divine pair.<note place='foot'>Nonius Marcellus, <hi rend='italic'>De compendiosa
doctrina</hi>, p. 125, ed. L. Quicherat
(Paris, 1872), <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hora juventutis dea.
Ennius Annali[um] lib. i. [Teque,]
Quirine pater, veneror, Horamque
Quirini.</foreign></q></note> In fact, of the five pairs of male and female deities
cited by Aulus Gellius from the priestly books and ancient speeches
the only one as to which we have not independent evidence that it
consisted of a husband and wife is Saturn and Lua; and in regard
to Lua we know that she was spoken of as a mother,<note place='foot'>Livy, viii. 1. 6, xlv. 33. 2.</note> which renders
it not improbable that she was also a wife. However, according to
some very respectable authorities the wife of Saturn was not Lua,
but Ops,<note place='foot'>Festus, p. 186, ed. C. O. Müller,
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Opima spolia dicuntur originem
quidem trahentia ab Ope Saturni
uxore</foreign></q>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p. 187, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Opis dicta est
conjux Saturni</foreign></q>; Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturnal.</hi>
i. 10. 19, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Hanc autem deam Opem
Saturni conjugem crediderunt, et ideo
hoc mense Saturnalia itemque Opalia
celebrari, quod Saturnus ejusque uxor
tam frugum quam fructuum repertores
esse creduntur.</foreign></q> Varro couples Saturn
and Ops together (<hi rend='italic'>De lingua Latina</hi>,
v. 57, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Principes in Latio Saturnus
et Ops</foreign></q>; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, v. 64), but
without expressly affirming them to
be husband and wife. Professor G.
Wissowa, however, argues that the
male partner (he would not say husband)
of Ops was not Saturn but
Consus. See G. Wissowa, <q><hi rend='italic'>De feriis
anni Romanorum vetustissimi observationes
selectae</hi>,</q> reprinted in his <hi rend='italic'>Gesammelte
Abhandlungen zur römischen
Religions- und Stadtgeschichte</hi> (Munich,
1904), pp. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> His view is accepted
by Mr. W. Warde Fowler (<hi rend='italic'>Roman
Festivals of the Period of the Republic</hi>,
p. 212; <hi rend='italic'>The Religious Experience of
the Roman People</hi>, p. 482).</note> so that we have two independent lines of proof that
Saturn was supposed to be married.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, the epithets <q>father</q> and <q>mother</q> which the Romans
bestowed on many of their deities<note place='foot'><p>Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>Divin. Instit.</hi> iv. 3,
<q rend='pre'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Itaque et Jupiter a precantibus pater
vocatur, et Saturnus, et Janus, et
Liber, et ceteri deinceps, quod Lucilius
in deorum consilio irridet</foreign></q>:
</p>
<p>
<q rend='post'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ut nemo sit nostrum, quin aut pater optimus divum<lb/>
Ut Neptunus pater, Liber, Saturnus pater, Mars,<lb/>
Janus, Quirinus pater nomen dicatur ad unum.</foreign></q>
</p>
<p>
Compare Aulus Gellius, v. 12. 5;
Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> ii. 4.
Roman goddesses who received the
title of Mother were Vesta, Earth,
Ops, Matuta, and Lua. As to Mother
Vesta see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 229; as to Mother
Earth see H. Dessau, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones
Latinae Selectae</hi>, Nos. 3950-3955,
3960; as to Mother Ops see Varro,
<hi rend='italic'>De lingua Latina</hi>, v. 64; as to
Mother Matuta see L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 322 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; G.
Wissowa, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der
Römer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Mater
Matuta,</q> in W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon
der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii.
2462 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> I cite these passages only
to prove that the Romans commonly
applied the titles <q>father</q> and
<q>mother</q> to their deities. The inference
that these titles implied paternity
or maternity is my own, but in the
text I have given some reasons for
thinking that the Romans themselves
accepted the implication. Mr. W.
Warde Fowler, on the other hand,
prefers to suppose that the titles were
employed in a merely figurative sense
to <q>imply the dependence of the
human citizen upon his divine protector</q>;
but he admits that what exactly
the Romans understood by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pater</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mater</foreign> applied to deities is not
easy to determine (<hi rend='italic'>The Religious Experience
of the Roman People</hi>, pp. 155-157).
He makes at the same time
the important observation that the
Romans never, so far as he is aware,
applied the terms Father and Mother
to foreign gods, but <q>always to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>di
indigetes</foreign>, those on whom the original
Roman stock looked as their fellow-citizens
and guardians.</q> The limitation
is significant and seems more
naturally explicable on my hypothesis
than on that of my learned friend.</p></note> are most naturally understood
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
to imply paternity and maternity; and if the implication is admitted,
the inference appears to be inevitable that these divine beings were
supposed to exercise sexual functions, whether in lawful marriage or
in unlawful concubinage. As to Jupiter in particular his paternity
is positively attested by Latin inscriptions, one of them very old,
which describe Fortuna Primigenia, the great goddess of Praeneste,
as his daughter.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</hi>,
xiv. Nos. 2862, 2863; H.
Dessau, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</hi>,
Nos. 3684, 3685; R. Peter, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
<q>Fortuna,</q> in W. H. Roscher's
<hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griechischen und römischen
Mythologie</hi>, i. 1542; G. Wissowa,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der Römer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p.
259. I have to thank my learned and
candid friend Mr. W. Warde Fowler
for referring me to this good evidence
of Jupiter's paternal character.</note> Again, the rustic deity Faunus, one of the oldest
and most popular gods of Italy,<note place='foot'>L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 379.</note> was represented by tradition in the
character of a husband and a father; one of the epithets applied to
him expressed in a coarse way his generative powers.<note place='foot'>The epithet <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Inuus</foreign> applied to
Faunus was so understood by the
ancients, and this suffices to prove the
conception they had of the god's
virility, whether the etymology was
right or wrong. See Servius, on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 775, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dicitur autem
Inuus ab ineundo passim cum omnibus
animalibus.</foreign></q> As to the title see G.
Wissowa, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der
Römer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 211, who, however, rejects
the ancient etymology and the identification
of Inuus with Faunus.</note> Fauna or
the Good Goddess (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bona Dea</foreign>), another of the oldest native Italian
deities, was variously called his wife or his daughter, and he is said
to have assumed the form of a snake in order to cohabit with her.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 21-24;
Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>Divin. Instit.</hi> i. 22;
Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> viii. 314;
Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Caesar</hi>, 9; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest.
Roman.</hi> 20. According to Varro,
the goddess was the daughter of
Faunus (Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 12. 27);
according to Sextus Clodius she was
his wife (Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; compare
Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus nationes</hi>, v. 18).</note>
Again, the most famous of all Roman myths represented the founder
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
of Rome himself, Romulus and his twin brother Remus, as begotten
by the god Mars on a Vestal Virgin;<note place='foot'>Livy, i. 4. 2; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Romulus</hi>,
4; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Roman.</hi> i. 77.</note> and every Roman who
accepted the tradition thereby acknowledged the fatherhood of the
god in the physical, not in a figurative, sense of the word. If the
story of the birth of Romulus and Remus should be dismissed as a
late product of the mythical fancy working under Greek influence,
the same objection can hardly be urged against the story of the birth
of another Roman king, Servius Tullius, who is said to have been a
son of the fire-god and a slave woman; his mother conceived him
beside the royal hearth, where she was impregnated by a flame that
shot out from the fire in the shape of the male organ of generation.<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
It would scarcely be possible to express the physical fatherhood of
the fire-god in more unambiguous terms. Now a precisely similar
story was told of the birth of Romulus himself;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Romulus</hi>, 2. Plutarch's
authority was Promathion in his history
of Italy. See <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the
Evolution of Kings</hi>, ii. 196.</note> and we may
suspect that this was an older form of the story than the legend
which fathered the twins on Mars. Similarly, Caeculus, the founder
of Praeneste, passed for a son of the fire-god Vulcan. It was said
that his mother was impregnated by a spark which leaped from the
fire and struck her as she sat by the hearth. In later life, when
Caeculus boasted of his divine parentage to a crowd, and they
refused to believe him, he prayed to his father to give the unbelievers
a sign, and straightway a lambent flame surrounded the
whole multitude. The proof was conclusive, and henceforth Caeculus
passed for a true son of the fire-god.<note place='foot'>Servius, on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vii. 678.</note> Such tales of kings or heroes
begotten by the fire-god on mortal women appear to be genuine old
Italian myths, which may well go back far beyond the foundation
of Rome to the common fountain of Aryan mythology; for the
marriage customs observed by various branches of the Aryan family
point clearly to a belief in the power of fire to impregnate women.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>We must
conclude
that the
Roman
gods were
thought to
be married
and to
beget
children.</note>
On the whole, if we follow the authority of the ancients
themselves, we seem bound to conclude that the Roman gods,
like those of many other early peoples, were believed to be
married and to beget children. It is true that, compared
with the full-blooded gods of Greece, the deities of Rome
appear to us shadowy creatures, pale abstractions garbed in little
that can vie with the gorgeous pall of myth and story which Grecian
fancy threw around its divine creations. Yet the few specimens of
Roman mythology which have survived the wreck of antiquity<note place='foot'>Such, for example, as the loves of
Vertumnus for Pomona (Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi>
xiv. 623 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), of Jupiter for Juturna
(Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, ii. 585 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), and of
Janus for Carna (Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, vi. 101
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) and for Camasene (Servius, on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> viii. 330). The water-nymph
Juturna beloved by Jupiter is
said to have been the daughter of the
river Vulturnus, the wife of Janus, and
the mother of Fontus (Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adversus
nationes</hi>, iii. 29). Janus in
particular would seem to have been
the theme of many myths, and his
claim to be a genuine Italian god has
never been disputed.</note>
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
justify us in believing that they are but fragments of far more
copious traditions which have perished. At all events the comparative
aridity and barrenness of the Roman religious imagination
is no reason for setting aside the positive testimony of learned
Roman writers as to a point of fundamental importance in their
own religion about which they could hardly be mistaken. It should
never be forgotten that on this subject the ancients had access to
many sources of information which are no longer open to us, and
for a modern scholar to reject their evidence in favour of a personal
impression derived from a necessarily imperfect knowledge of the
facts seems scarcely consistent with sound principles of history and
criticism.<note place='foot'>The marriage of the Roman gods
has been denied by E. Aust (<hi rend='italic'>Die Religion
der Römer</hi>, Münster i. W. 1899,
pp. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>) and Professor G. Wissowa
(<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der Römer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp.
26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), as well as by Mr. W. Warde
Fowler. On the other hand, the
evidence for it has been clearly and
concisely stated by L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 55-57. It is with
sincere diffidence that I venture to
differ on a point of Roman religion
from the eminent scholars I have
named. But without for a moment
pitting my superficial acquaintance with
Roman religion against their deep learning,
I cannot but think that the single
positive testimony of Varro on a matter
about which he could scarcely be ignorant
ought to outweigh the opinion of
any modern scholar, however learned
and able.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Children of Living Parents in Ritual.'/>
<head>§ 3. Children of Living Parents in Ritual.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Rule of
Greek and
Roman
ritual that
certain
offices
could only
be held by
boys whose
parents
were both
alive.</note>
But Dr. Farnell adduces another argument in support of his
view that it was the pollution of death which obliged the widowed
Flamen Dialis to resign the priesthood. He points to what he considers
the analogy of the rule of Greek ritual which required that
certain sacred offices should be discharged only by a boy whose parents
were both alive.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Hibbert Journal</hi>, April 1907,
p. 689. Such a boy was called a παῖς
ἀμφιθαλής, <q>a boy blooming on both
sides,</q> the metaphor being drawn from
a tree which sends out branches on
both sides. See Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Laws</hi>, xi. 8,
p. 927 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>; Julius Pollux, iii. 25;
Hesychius and Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> ἀμφιθαλής.</note> This rule he would explain in like manner by
supposing that the death of one or both of his parents would render
a boy ceremonially impure and therefore unfit to perform religious
functions. Dr. Farnell might have apparently strengthened his case
by observing that the Flamen Dialis and the Flaminica Dialis were
themselves assisted in their office, the one by a boy, the other by a
girl, both of whose parents must be alive.<note place='foot'>Festus, p. 93, ed. C. O. Müller,
<hi rend='italic'>s.vv.</hi> <q>Flaminius</q> and <q>Flaminia.</q>
That certain Roman rites had to be
performed by the children of living
parents is mentioned in general terms
by Dionysius of Halicarnassus (<hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Rom.</hi> ii. 22).</note> At first sight this fits in
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
perfectly with his theory: the Flamen, the Flaminica, and their
youthful ministers were all rendered incapable of performing their
sacred duties by the taint or corruption of death.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But the
rule which
excludes
orphans
from certain
sacred
offices
cannot be
based on
a theory
that they
are ceremonially
unclean
through
the death
of their
parents.</note>
But a closer scrutiny of the argument reveals a flaw. It proves
too much. For observe that in these Greek and Roman offices
held by boys and girls the disqualification caused by the death of a
parent is necessarily lifelong, since the bereavement is irreparable.
Accordingly, if Dr. Farnell's theory is right, the ceremonial pollution
which is the cause of the disqualification must also be lifelong; in
other words, every orphan is ceremoniously unclean for life and
thereby excluded for ever from the discharge of sacred duties. So
sweeping a rule would at a stroke exclude a large, if not the larger,
part of the population of any country from the offices of religion,
and lay them permanently under all those burdensome restrictions
which the pollution of death entails among many nations; for
obviously a large, if not the larger, part of the population of any
country at any time has lost one or both of its parents by death.
No people, so far as I know, has ever carried the theory of the
ceremonial pollution of death to this extremity in practice. And
even if it were supposed that the taint wore off or evaporated with
time from common folk so as to let them go about their common
duties in everyday life, would it not still cleave to priests? If it
incapacitated the Flamen's minister, would it not incapacitate the
Flamen himself? In other words, would not the Flamen Dialis be
obliged to vacate office on the death of his father or mother? There
is no hint in ancient writers that he had to do so. And while
it is generally unsafe to argue from the silence of our authorities,
I think that we may do so in this case without being rash; for
Plutarch not only mentions but discusses the rule which obliged the
Flamen Dialis to resign office on the death of his wife,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Romanae</hi>, 50.</note> and if he
had known of a parallel rule which compelled him to retire on the
death of a parent, he would surely have mentioned it. But if the
ceremonial pollution which would certainly be caused by the death
of a parent did not compel the Flamen Dialis to vacate office, we
may safely conclude that neither did the similar pollution caused
by the death of his wife. Thus the argument adduced by Dr.
Farnell in favour of his view proves on analysis to tell strongly
against it.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Examples
of the
exclusion
of orphans
from sacred
offices.</note>
But if the rule which excluded orphans from certain sacred
offices cannot with any probability be explained on the theory of
their ceremonial pollution, it may be worth while to inquire whether
another and better explanation of the rule cannot be found. For
that purpose I shall collect all the cases of it known to me. The
collection is doubtless far from complete: I only offer it as a
starting-point for research.
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Boys and
girls of
living
parents
employed
in Greek
rites at the
vintage,
harvest-home,
and
sowing.</note>
At the time of the vintage, which in Greece falls in October,
Athenian boys chosen from every tribe assembled at the sanctuary
of Dionysus, the god of the vine. There, branches of vines laden
with ripe grapes were given to them, and holding them in their
hands they raced to the sanctuary of Athena Sciras. The winner
received and drained a cup containing a mixture of olive-oil, wine,
honey, cheese, and barley-groats. It was necessary that both the
parents of each of these boy-runners should be alive.<note place='foot'>Proclus, in Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>,
p. 322 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, ed. I. Bekker (Berlin,
1824); Athenaeus, xi. 92, pp. 495
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Scholiast on Nicander, <hi rend='italic'>Alexipharmaca</hi>,
109. Only the last of
these writers mentions that the boys
had to be ἀμφιθαλεῖς. As to this
and the following custom see A.
Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Feste der Stadt Athen im
Altertum</hi> (Leipsic, 1898), pp. 278
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt, Antike <hi rend='italic'>Wald-
und Feldkulte</hi>, pp. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> At the
same festival, and perhaps on the same day, an Athenian boy, whose
parents must both be alive, carried in procession a branch of olive
wreathed with white and purple wool and decked with fruits of
many kinds, while a chorus sang that the branch bore figs, fat
loaves, honey, oil, and wine. Thus they went in procession to a
temple of Apollo, at the door of which the boy deposited the holy
bough. The ceremony is said to have been instituted by the
Athenians in obedience to an oracle for the purpose of supplicating
the help of the god in a season of dearth.<note place='foot'>Eustathius, on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xxii.
495, p. 1283; <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicum Magnum</hi>,
p. 303. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Εἰρεσιώνη; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Theseus</hi>, 22. According to a
scholiast on Aristophanes (<hi rend='italic'>Plutus</hi>,
1054) the branch might be either of
olive or laurel.</note> Similar boughs
similarly laden with fruits and loaves were hung up on the doors of
every Athenian house and allowed to remain there a year, at the
end of which they were replaced by fresh ones. While the branch
was being fastened to the door, a boy whose parents were both
alive recited the same verses about the branch bearing figs, fat
loaves, honey, oil, and wine. This custom also is said to have
been instituted for the sake of putting an end to a dearth.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Plutus</hi>,
1054.</note> The
people of Magnesia on the Maeander vowed a bull every year to
Zeus, the Saviour of the City, in the month of Cronion, at the
beginning of sowing, and after maintaining the animal at the public
expense throughout the winter they sacrificed it, apparently at
harvest-time, in the following summer. Nine boys and nine girls,
whose fathers and mothers were all living, took part in the religious
services of the consecration and the sacrifice of the bull. At the
consecration public prayers were offered for the safety of the city
and the land, for the safety of the citizens and their wives and
children, for the safety of all that dwelt in the city and the land,
for peace and wealth and abundance of corn and all other fruits,
and for the cattle. A herald led the prayers, and the priest and
priestess, the boys and girls, the high officers and magistrates, all
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
joined in these solemn petitions for the welfare of their country.<note place='foot'>O. Kern, <hi rend='italic'>Die Inschriften von
Magnesia am Maeander</hi> (Berlin, 1900),
No. 98; G. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> vol. ii. pp.
246 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No. 553. This inscription
has been well expounded by Prof.
M. P. Nilsson (<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Feste</hi>,
Leipsic, 1906, pp. 23-27). I follow
him and Dittenberger in regarding
the month of Artemision, when the
bull was sacrificed, as the harvest
month corresponding to the Attic
Thargelion.</note>
Among the Karo-Bataks of Central Sumatra the threshing of the
rice is the occasion of various ceremonies, and in these a prominent
part is played by a girl, whose father and mother must be both alive.
Her special duty is to take care of the sheaf of rice in which the soul
of the rice is believed to reside. This sheaf usually consists of the
first rice cut and bound in the field; it is treated exactly like a
person.<note place='foot'>J. H. Neumann, <q>Iets over den
landbouw bij de Karo-Bataks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xlvi. (1902) p. 381.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Boys of
living
parents
employed
in the rites
of the
Arval
Brothers.</note>
The rites thus far described, in which boys and girls of living
parents took part, were clearly ceremonies intended specially to
ensure the fertility of the soil. This is indicated not merely by the
nature of the rites and of the prayers or verses which accompanied
them, but also by the seasons at which they were observed; for
these were the vintage, the harvest-home, and the beginning of
sowing. We may therefore compare a custom practised by the
Roman Brethren of the Ploughed Fields (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fratres Arvales</foreign>), a college
of priests whose business it was to perform the rites deemed necessary
for the growth of the corn. As a badge of office they wore
wreaths of corn-ears, and paid their devotions to an antique goddess
of fertility, the Dea Dia. Her home was in a grove of ancient
evergreen oaks and laurels out in the Campagna, five miles from
Rome. Hither every year in the month of May, when the fields
were ripe or ripening to the sickle, reaped ears of the new corn were
brought and hallowed by the Brethren with quaint rites, that a
blessing might rest on the coming harvest. The first or preliminary
consecration of the ears, however, took place, not in the grove, but
in the house of the Master of the Brethren at Rome. Here the
Brethren were waited upon by four free-born boys, the children of
living fathers and mothers. While the Brethren reclined on couches,
the boys were allowed to sit on chairs and partake of the feast, and
when it was over they carried the rest of the now hallowed corn and
laid it on the altar.<note place='foot'>G. Henzen, <hi rend='italic'>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</hi>
(Berlin, 1874), pp. vi. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, cix.
cx. cxix. cliii. clix. clxxxvii. 12, 13,
15. As to the evergreen oaks and
laurels of the grove, see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>, pp. 137,
138; as to the wreaths of corn-ears,
see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>, pp. 26, 28; Aulus Gellius,
vii. 7. 8. That the rites performed
by the Arval Brothers were intended
to make the fields bear corn is expressly
stated by Varro (<hi rend='italic'>De lingua
Latina</hi>, v. 85, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fratres Arvales dicti
sunt, qui sacra publica faciunt propterea
ut fruges ferant arva</foreign></q>). On
the Arval Brothers and their rites
see also L. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
ii. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. Marquardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Leipsic,
1885) pp. 447-462; G. Wissowa,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Kultus der Römer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> pp.
561 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; J. B. Carter, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Arval
Brothers,</q> in J. Hastings's <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
of Religion and Ethics</hi>, ii.
(Edinburgh, 1909) pp. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In fertility
rites the
employment
of
such
children is
intelligible
on the
principle
of sympathetic
magic.</note>
In these and all other rites intended to ensure the fertility of
the ground, of cattle, or of human beings, the employment of
children of living parents seems to be intelligible on the principle
of sympathetic magic; for such children might be deemed fuller
of life than orphans, either because they <q>flourished on both sides,</q>
as the Greeks put it, or because the very survival of their parents
might be taken as a proof that the stock of which the children came
was vigorous and therefore able to impart of its superabundant
energy to others.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sons of
living
parents
employed
to cut the
olive-wreath
at Olympia
and the
laurel-wreath
at
Tempe.</note>
But the rites in which the children of living parents are required
to officiate do not always aim at promoting the growth of the crops.
At Olympia the olive-branches which formed the victors' crowns
had to be cut from a sacred tree with a golden sickle by a lad whose
father and mother must be both alive.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi> iii. 60.</note> The tree was a wild olive
growing within the holy precinct, at the west end of the temple of
Zeus. It bore the name of the Olive of the Fair Crown, and near
it was an altar to the Nymphs of the Fair Crowns.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, v. 15. 3.</note> At Delphi
every eighth year a sacred drama or miracle-play was acted which
drew crowds of spectators from all parts of Greece. It set forth
the slaying of the Dragon by Apollo. The principal part was
sustained by a lad, the son of living parents, who seems to have
personated the god himself. In an open space the likeness of a
lordly palace, erected for the occasion, represented the Dragon's
den. It was attacked and burned by the lad, aided by women who
carried blazing torches. When the Dragon had received his deadly
wound, the lad, still acting the part of the god, fled far away to
be purged of the guilt of blood in the beautiful Vale of Tempe,
where the Peneus flows in a deep wooded gorge between the
snowy peaks of Olympus and Ossa, its smooth and silent tide
shadowed by overhanging trees and tall white cliffs. In places
these great crags rise abruptly from the stream and approach
each other so near that only a narrow strip of sky is visible overhead;
but where they recede a little, the meadows at their foot
are verdant with evergreen shrubs, among which Apollo's own laurel
may still be seen. In antiquity the god himself, stained with the
Dragon's blood, is said to have come, a haggard footsore wayfarer,
to this wild secluded glen and there plucked branches from
one of the laurels that grew in its green thickets beside the
rippling river. Some of them he used to twine a wreath for his
brows, one of them he carried in his hand, doubtless in order that,
guarded by the sacred plant, he might escape the hobgoblins which
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
dogged his steps. So the boy, his human representative, did the
same, and brought back to Delphi wreaths of laurel from the same
tree to be awarded to the victors in the Pythian games. Hence
the whole festival of the Slaying of the Dragon at Delphi went by
the name of the Festival of Crowning.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Graecae</hi>, 12;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De defectu oraculorum</hi>, 15; Aelian,
<hi rend='italic'>Varia Historia</hi>, iii. 1; Strabo, ix. 3.
12, p. 422. In a note on Pausanias
(ii. 7. 7, vol. iii. pp. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) I have
described the festival more fully and
adduced savage parallels. As to the
Vale of Tempe see W. M. Leake,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels in Northern Greece</hi> (London,
1835), iii. 390 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The rhetoric of
Livy (xliv. 6. 8) has lashed the smooth
and silent current of the Peneus into a
roaring torrent.</note> From this it appears
that at Delphi as well as at Olympia the boughs which were used
to crown the victors had to be cut from a sacred tree by a boy
whose parents must be both alive.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Sons of
living
parents
acted as
Laurel-bearers
at
Thebes.</note>
At Thebes a festival called the Laurel-bearing was held once in
every eight years, when branches of laurel were carried in procession
to the temple of Apollo. The principal part in the procession was
taken by a boy who held a laurel bough and bore the title of the
Laurel-bearer: he seems to have personated the god himself. His
hair hung down on his shoulders, and he wore a golden crown, a
bright-coloured robe, and shoes of a special shape: both his parents
must be alive.<note place='foot'>Proclus, in Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>,
ed. I. Bekker, p. 321.</note> We may suppose that the golden crown which he
wore was fashioned in the shape of laurel leaves and replaced a
wreath of real laurel. Thus the boy with the laurel wreath on
his head and the laurel bough in his hand would resemble the
traditional equipment of Apollo when he purified himself for the
slaughter of the dragon. We may conjecture that at Thebes the
Laurel-bearer originally personated not Apollo but the local hero
Cadmus, who slew the dragon and had like Apollo to purify himself
for the slaughter. The conjecture is confirmed by vase-paintings
which represent Cadmus crowned with laurel preparing to attack the
dragon or actually in combat with the monster, while goddesses
bend over him holding out wreaths of laurel as the meed of victory.<note place='foot'>O. Crusius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Kadmos,</q> in
W. H. Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech.
und röm. Mythologie</hi>, ii. 830, 838, 839.
On an Etruscan mirror the scene of
Cadmus's combat with the dragon is
surrounded with a wreath of laurel
(O. Crusius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 862). My learned
friend Mr. A. B. Cook was the first to
call attention to these vase-paintings
in confirmation of my view that the
Festival of the Laurel-bearing celebrated
the destruction of the dragon
by Cadmus. See A. B. Cook, <q>The
European Sky-God,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>, xv.
(1904) p. 411, note 224; and my note
on Pausanias, ix. 10. 4 (vol. v. pp.
41 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>).</note>
On this hypothesis the octennial Delphic Festival of Crowning and
the octennial Theban Festival of Laurel-bearing were closely akin:
in both the prominent part played by the laurel was purificatory or
expiatory.<note place='foot'>I have examined both festivals
more closely in a former part of this
work (<hi rend='italic'>The Dying God</hi>, pp. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>),
and have shown grounds for holding
that the old octennial cycle in Greece,
based on an attempt to harmonize solar
and lunar time, gave rise to an octennial
festival at which the mythical marriage
of the sun and moon was celebrated by
the dramatic marriage of human actors,
who appear sometimes to have been
the king and queen. In the Laurel-bearing
at Thebes a clear reference
to the astronomical character of the
festival is contained in the emblems of
the sun, moon, stars, and days of the
year which were carried in procession
(Proclus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>); and another reference
to it may be detected in the legendary
marriage of Cadmus and Harmonia.
Dr. L. R. Farnell supposes that the
festival of the Laurel-bearing <q>belongs
to the maypole processions, universal in
the peasant-religion of Europe, of which
the object is to quicken the vitalizing
powers of the year in the middle of
spring or at the beginning of summer</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>, iv. 285).
But this explanation appears to be inconsistent
with the octennial period of
the festival.</note> Thus at Olympia, Delphi, and Thebes a boy whose
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
parents were both alive was entrusted with the duty of cutting or
wearing a sacred wreath at a great festival which recurred at intervals
of several years.<note place='foot'>We may conjecture that the
Olympic, like the Delphic and the
Theban, festival was at first octennial,
though in historical times it was
quadrennial. Certainly it seems to
have been based on an octennial cycle.
See the Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Olymp.</hi>
iii. 35 (20); Aug. Boeckh on Pindar,
<hi rend='italic'>Explicationes</hi> (Leipsic, 1821), p. 138;
L. Ideler, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der mathematischen
und technischen Chronologie</hi>, i. 366
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; G. F. Unger, <q>Zeitrechnung der
Griechen und Römer,</q> in Iwan Müller's
<hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft</hi>,
i. (Nördlingen, 1886)
pp. 605 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; K. O. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Die Dorier</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(Breslau, 1844), ii. 483. The Pythian
games, which appear to have been at
first identical with the Delphic Festival
of Crowning, were held originally at
intervals of eight instead of four years.
See the Scholiast on Pindar, <hi rend='italic'>Pyth. Argum.</hi>
p. 298, ed. A. Boeckh (Leipsic,
1819); Censorinus, <hi rend='italic'>De die natali</hi>,
xviii. 6; compare Eustathius on Homer,
<hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> iii. 267, p. 1466. 29. As to the
original identity of the Pythian games
and the Festival of Crowning see Th.
Schreiber, <hi rend='italic'>Apollon Pythoktonos</hi> (Leipsic,
1879), pp. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. B. Cook,
<q>The European Sky-God,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore</hi>,
xv. (1904) pp. 404 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>If wreaths
were
originally
amulets,
we could
understand
why
children
of living
parents
were
chosen to
cut and
wear them.</note>
Why a boy of living parents should be chosen for such an office
is not at first sight clear; the reason might be more obvious if we
understood the ideas in which the custom of wearing wreaths and
crowns had its origin. Probably in many cases wreaths and crowns
were amulets before they were ornaments; in other words, their
first intention may have been not so much to adorn the head as to
protect it from harm by surrounding it with a plant, a metal, or any
other thing which was supposed to possess the magical virtue of
banning baleful influences. Thus the Arabs of Moab will put a
circlet of copper on the head of a man who is suffering from
headache, for they believe that this will banish the pain; and if the
pain is in an arm or a leg, they will treat the ailing limb in like
manner. They think that red beads hung before the eyes of
children who are afflicted with ophthalmia will rid them of the
malady, and that a red ribbon tied to the foot will prevent it from
stumbling on a stony path.<note place='foot'>Antonin Jaussen, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes des
Arabes au pays de Moab</hi> (Paris, 1908),
p. 382.</note> Again, the Melanesians of the Gazelle
Peninsula in New Britain often deck their dusky bodies with
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
flowers, leaves, and scented herbs not only at festivals but on other
occasions which to the European might seem inappropriate for
such gay ornaments. But in truth the bright blossoms and verdant
foliage are not intended to decorate the wearer but to endow him
with certain magical virtues, which are supposed to inhere in the
flowers and leaves. Thus one man may be seen strutting about
with a wreath of greenery which passes round his neck and droops
over his shoulders, back, and breast. He is not a mere dandy, but
a lover who hopes that the wreath will work as a charm on a
woman's heart. Again, another may be observed with a bunch of
the red dracaena leaves knotted round his neck and the long stalk
hanging down his back. He is a soldier, and these leaves are
supposed to make him invulnerable. But if the lover should fail to
win the affections of his swarthy mistress, if the warrior should be
wounded in battle, it never occurs to either of them to question
the magical virtue of the charm; they ascribe the failure either
to the more potent charm of another magician or to some
oversight on their own part.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Dreissig Jahre in der
Südsee</hi> (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 150-152.</note> On the theory that wreaths and
garlands serve as amulets to protect the wearer against the powers
of evil we can understand not only why in antiquity sacred
persons such as priests and kings wore crowns, but also why
dead bodies, sacrificial victims, and in certain circumstances even
inanimate objects such as the implements of sacrifice, the doors
of houses, and so forth, were decorated or rather guarded by
wreaths.<note place='foot'>On the use of crowns and wreaths
in classical antiquity see W. Smith's
<hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
i. 545 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Corona</q>;
E. Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Corona,</q> in Ch. Daremberg
et E. Saglio's <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des
Antiquités Grecques et Romaines</hi>, iii.
1520 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> In time of mourning the
ancients laid aside crowns (Athenaeus,
xv. 16, p. 675 A); and so did the
king at Athens when he tried a homicide
(Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Constitution of Athens</hi>,
57). I mention these cases because
they seem to conflict with the theory
in the text, in accordance with which
crowns might be regarded as amulets
to protect the wearer against ghosts
and the pollution of blood.</note> Further, on this hypothesis we may perhaps perceive
why children of living parents were specially chosen to cut or wear
sacred wreaths. Since such children were apparently supposed to
be endowed with a more than common share of vital energy, they
might be deemed peculiarly fitted to make or wear amulets which
were designed to protect the wearer from injury and death: the
current of life which circulated in their own veins overflowed, as it
were, and reinforced the magic virtue of the wreath. For the same
reason such children would naturally be chosen to personate gods,
as they seemingly were at Delphi and Thebes.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Children
of living
parents
acting as
priest and
priestess
of Apollo
and
Artemis.
At Rome
the Vestals
and the
Salii must
be the
children
of parents
who were
alive at the
date of the
election.
Children of
living
parents
employed
in expiatory
rites
at Rome.</note>
At Ephesus, if we may trust the evidence of the Greek romance-writer,
Heliodorus, a boy and girl of living parents used to hold for a
year the priesthood of Apollo and Artemis respectively. When their
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
period of office was nearly expired, they led a sacred embassy to
Delos, the birthplace of the divine brother and sister, where they
superintended the musical and athletic contests and laid down the
priesthood.<note place='foot'>Heliodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Aethiopica</hi>, i. 22.</note> At Rome no girl might be chosen a Vestal Virgin
unless both her father and mother were living;<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, i. 12. 2.</note> yet there is no
evidence or probability that a Vestal vacated office on the death of
a parent; indeed she generally held office for life.<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Rom.</hi> ii. 67; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>,
10. We read of a Vestal who held
office for fifty-seven years (Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Annals</hi>, ii. 86). It is unlikely that
the parents of this venerable lady were
both alive at the date of her decease.</note> This alone may
suffice to prove that the custom of entrusting certain sacred duties
to children of living parents was not based on any notion that
orphans as such were ceremonially unclean. Again, the dancing
priests of Mars, the Salii, must be sons of living parents;<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Rom.</hi> ii. 71.</note> but as in
the case of the Vestals this condition probably only applied at the
date of their election, for they seem like the Vestals to have held
office for life. At all events we read of a lively old gentleman who
still skipped and capered about as a dancing priest with an agility
which threw the efforts of his younger colleagues into the shade.<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> iii. 14. 14. That
the rule as to their parents being both
alive applied to the Vestals and Salii
only at the time of their entrance
on office is recognized by Marquardt
(<hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 228,
note 1).</note>
Again, at the public games in Rome boys of living parents had to
escort the images of the gods in their sacred cars, and it was a dire
omen if one of them relaxed his hold on the holy cart or let a strap
slip from his fingers.<note place='foot'>Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De haruspicum responso</hi>,
11.</note> And when the stout Roman heart was
shaken by the appalling news that somebody had been struck by
lightning, that the sky had somewhere been suddenly overcast, or
that a she-mule had been safely delivered of a colt, boys and girls
whose fathers and mothers were still alive used to be sought out and
employed to help in expiating the terrific prodigy.<note place='foot'>Livy, xxxvii. 3; Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi>
i. 6. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Vopiscus, <hi rend='italic'>Aurelianus</hi>, 19
(where the words <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>patrimis matrimisque
pueris carmen indicite</foreign></q> are
omitted from the text by H. Peter).</note> Again, when
the Capitol had been sacked and burned by the disorderly troops of
Vitellius, solemn preparations were made to rebuild it. The whole
area was enclosed by a cordon of fillets and wreaths. Then soldiers
chosen for their auspicious names entered within the barriers holding
branches of lucky trees in their hands; and afterwards the Vestal
Virgins, aided by boys and girls of living parents, washed the
foundations with water drawn from springs and rivers.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Histor.</hi> iv. 53. For the
sack and conflagration of the Capitol
see <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> iii. 71-75.</note> In this
ceremony the choice of such children seems to be based on the same
idea as the choice of such water; for as running water is deemed to
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
be especially alive,<note place='foot'>Flowing water in Hebrew is
called <q>living water</q> (מים היים).</note> so the vital current might be thought to flow
without interruption in the children of living parents but to stagnate
in orphans. Hence the children of living parents rather than orphans
would naturally be chosen to pour the living water over the foundations,
and so to lend something of their own vitality or endurance to
a building that was designed to last for ever.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Children
of living
parents
employed
at marriage
ceremonies
in Greece,
Italy,
Albania,
Bulgaria,
and Africa.</note>
On the same principle we can easily understand why the
children of living parents should be especially chosen to perform
certain offices at marriage. The motive of such a choice may be a
wish to ensure by sympathetic magic the life of the newly wedded
pair and of their offspring. Thus at Roman marriages the bride
was escorted to her new home by three boys whose parents were all
living. Two of the boys held her, and the third carried a torch of
buckthorn or hawthorn in front of her,<note place='foot'>Festus, <hi rend='italic'>De verborum significatione</hi>,
ed. C. O. Müller (Leipsic, 1839), pp.
244, 245, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Patrimi et matrimi
pueri.</q></note> probably for the purpose
of averting the powers of evil; for buckthorn or hawthorn was
credited with this magical virtue.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, vi. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 165-168.</note> At marriages in ancient Athens
a boy whose parents were both living used to wear a wreath of
thorns and acorns and to carry about a winnowing-fan full of loaves,
crying, <q>I have escaped the bad, I have found the better.</q><note place='foot'>Zenobius, <hi rend='italic'>Proverb.</hi> iii. 98; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Proverb.</hi> i. 16; Apostolius,
<hi rend='italic'>Proverb.</hi> viii. 16 (<hi rend='italic'>Paroemiographi
Graeci</hi>, ed. Leutsch et Schneidewin, i.
82, 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 429); Eustathius, on
Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> xii. 357, p. 1726;
Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> ἔφυγον κακόν.</note> In
modern Greece on the Sunday before a marriage the bridegroom
sends to the bride the wedding cake by the hands of a boy, both of
whose parents must be living. The messenger takes great care not
to stumble or to injure the cake, for to do either would be a very
bad omen. He may not enter the bride's house till she has taken
the cake from him. For this purpose he lays it down on the
threshold of the door, and then both of them, the boy and the
bride, rush at it and try to seize the greater part of the cake. And
when cattle are being slaughtered for the marriage festivities, the
first beast killed for the bride's house must be killed by a youth
whose parents are both alive. Further, a son of living parents must
solemnly fetch the water with which the bridegroom's head is
ceremonially washed by women before marriage. And on the day
after the marriage bride and bridegroom go in procession to the
well or spring from which they are henceforth to fetch their water.
The bride greets the spring, drinks of the water from the hollow of
her hand, and throws money and food into it. Then follows a
dance, accompanied by a song, round about the spring. Lastly, a
lad whose parents are both living draws water from the spring in
a special vessel and carries it to the house of the bridal pair without
speaking a word: this <q>unspoken water,</q> as it is called, is regarded
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
as peculiarly holy and wholesome. When the young couple return
from the spring, they fill their mouths with the <q>unspoken water</q>
and try to spirt it on each other inside the door of the house.<note place='foot'>C. Wachsmuth, <hi rend='italic'>Das alte Griechenland
im neuen</hi> (Bonn, 1864), pp. 83-85,
86, 87, 100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
Albania, when women are baking cakes for a wedding, the first to
put hand to the dough must be a maiden whose parents are both
alive and who has brothers, the more the better; for only such a
girl is deemed lucky. And when the bride has dismounted from
her horse at the bridegroom's door, a small boy whose parents are
both alive (for only such a boy is thought to bring luck) is passed
thrice backwards and forwards under the horse's belly, as if he
would girdle the beast.<note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Albanesische
Studien</hi> (Jena, 1854), i. 144, 146.</note> Among the South Slavs of Bulgaria a
little child whose father and mother are both alive helps to bake the
two bridal cakes, pouring water and salt on the meal and stirring
the mixture with a spurtle of a special shape; then a girl lifts the
child in her arms, and the little one touches the roof-beam thrice
with the spurtle, saying, <q>Boys and girls.</q> And when the bride's
hair is to be dressed for the wedding day, the work of combing and
plaiting it must be begun by a child of living parents.<note place='foot'>F. S. Krauss, <hi rend='italic'>Sitte und Brauch
der Süd-Slaven</hi> (Vienna, 1885), pp.
438, 441.</note> Among the
Eesa and Gadabursi, two Somali tribes, on the morning after a
marriage <q>the bride's female relations bring presents of milk, and
are accompanied by a young male child whose parents are living.
The child drinks some of the milk before any one else tastes it;
and after him the bridegroom, if his parents are living; but if one
or both of his parents are dead, and those of the bride living, she
drinks after the child. By doing this they believe that if the newly-married
woman bears a child the father will be alive at the time.</q><note place='foot'>Captain J. S. King, <q>Notes on
the Folk-lore and some Social Customs
of the Western Somali Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The
Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vi. (1888) p. 124.
Compare Ph. Paulitschke, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographie
Nordost-Afrikas, die materielle
Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</hi>
(Berlin, 1893), p. 200.</note>
A slightly different application of the same principle appears in
the old Hindoo rule that when a bride reached the house of her
husband, she should be made to descend from the chariot by women
of good character whose husbands and sons were living, and that
afterwards these women should seat the bride on a bull's hide, while
her husband recited the verse, <q>Here ye cows, bring forth calves.</q><note place='foot'>The <hi rend='italic'>Grihya-Sûtras</hi>, translated by
H. Oldenberg, Part ii. (Oxford, 1892)
p. 50 (<hi rend='italic'>The Sacred Books of the East</hi>,
vol. xxx.).</note>
Here the ceremony of seating the young wife on a bull's hide seems
plainly intended to make her fruitful through the generative virtue
of the bull; while the attendance of women, whose husbands and
sons are living, is no doubt a device for ensuring, by sympathetic
magic, the life both of the bride's husband and of her future offspring.
</p>

<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Children
of living
parents
apparently
supposed
to impart
life and
longevity.
Child of
living
parents
employed
in funeral
rites.</note>
In the Somali custom just described the part played by the child
of living parents is unambiguous and helps to throw light on the
obscurer cases which precede. Such a child is clearly supposed to
impart the virtue of longevity to the milk of which it partakes, and
so to transmit it to the newly married pair who afterwards drink of
the milk. Similarly, we may suppose that in all marriage rites at
least, if not in religious rites generally, the employment of children
of living parents is intended to diffuse by sympathy the blessings of
life and longevity among all who participate in the ceremonies.
This intention seems to underlie the use which the Malagasy make
of the children of living parents in ritual. Thus, when a child is a
week old, it is dressed up in the finest clothes that can be got, and
is then carried out of the house by some person whose parents are
both still living; afterwards it is brought back to the mother. In
the act of being carried out and in, the infant must be twice carefully
lifted over the fire, which is placed near the door. If the
child is a boy, the axe, knife, and spear of the family, together with
any building tools that may be in the house, are taken out of it at
the same time. <q>The implements are perhaps used chiefly as
emblems of the occupations in which it is expected the infant will
engage when it arrives at maturer years; and the whole may be
regarded as expressing the hopes cherished of his activity, wealth,
and enjoyments.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. William Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History of
Madagascar</hi> (London, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n.d.</hi>), i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On such an occasion the service of a person
whose parents are both alive seems naturally calculated to promote
the longevity of the infant. For a like reason, probably, the holy
water used at the Malagasy ceremony of circumcision is drawn from
a pool by a person whose parents are both still living.<note place='foot'>Rev. W. Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 180.</note> The same
idea may explain a funeral custom observed by the Sihanaka of
Madagascar. After a burial the family of the deceased, with their
near relatives and dependents, meet in the house from which the
corpse was lately removed <q>to drink rum and to undergo a purifying
and preserving baptism called <foreign rend='italic'>fàfy rànom-bóahàngy</foreign>. Leaves of the
lemon or lime tree, and the stalks of two kinds of grass, are gathered
and placed in a vessel with water. A person, both of whose parents
are living, is chosen to perform the rite, and this <q>holy water</q> is then
sprinkled upon the walls of the house and upon all assembled within
them, and finally around the house outside.</q><note place='foot'>J. Pearse, <q>Customs connected
with Death and Burial among the
Sihanaka,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Antananarivo Annual
and Madagascar Magazine</hi>, vol. ii. (a
reprint of the second four numbers,
1881-1884) (Antananarivo, 1896) p.
152.</note> Here a person whose
parents are both living appears to be credited with a more than
common share of life and longevity; from which it naturally follows
that he is better fitted than any one else to perform a ceremony
intended to avert the danger of death from the household.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The use
of children
of living
parents in
ritual may
be explained
by
a notion
that they
are fuller
of life and
therefore
luckier
than
orphans.</note>
The notion that a child of living parents is endowed with a
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
higher degree of vitality than an orphan probably explains all the
cases of the employment of such a child in ritual, whether the
particular rite is designed to ensure the fertility of the ground or
the fruitfulness of women, or to avert the danger of death and
other calamities. Yet it might be a mistake to suppose that this
notion is always clearly apprehended by the persons who practise
the customs. In their minds the definite conception of superabundant
and overflowing vitality may easily dissolve into a vague
idea that the child of living parents is luckier than other folk. No
more than this seems to be at the bottom of the Masai rule that
when the warriors wish to select a chief, they must choose <q>a man
whose parents are still living, who owns cattle and has never killed
anybody, whose parents are not blind, and who himself has not a
discoloured eye.</q><note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi> (Oxford,
1905), p. 299.</note> And nothing more is needed to explain the
ancient Greek custom which assigned the duty of drawing lots from
an urn to a boy under puberty whose father and mother were both
in life.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Hermotimus</hi>, 57.</note> At Athens it would appear that registers of these boys
were kept, perhaps in order that the lads might discharge, as
occasion arose, those offices of religion which required the service
of such auspicious youths.<note place='foot'>A fragmentary list of these youths
is preserved in an Athenian inscription
of the year 91 or 90 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> See
Ch. Michel, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions
Grecques</hi>, Supplément, i. (Paris, 1912)
p. 104, No. 1544.</note> The atrocious tyrant Heliogabalus, one
of the worst monsters who ever disgraced the human form, caused
search to be made throughout Italy for noble and handsome boys
whose parents were both alive, and he sacrificed them to his barbarous
gods, torturing them first and grabbling among their entrails afterwards
for omens. He seems to have thought that such victims
would be peculiarly acceptable to the Syrian deities whom he
worshipped; so he encouraged the torturers and butchers at their
work, and thanked the gods for enabling him to ferret out <q>their
friends.</q><note place='foot'>Aelius Lampridius, <hi rend='italic'>Antoninus
Heliogabalus</hi>, viii. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The historian
thinks that the monster chose these
victims merely for the pleasure of
rending the hearts of both the parents.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>III. A Charm To Protect a Town.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
Bechuanas
use the
hide of a
sacrificial
ox at
founding a
new town.</note>
The tradition that a Lydian king tried to make the citadel of Sardes
impregnable by carrying round it a lion<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. p. 184.</note> may perhaps be illustrated
by a South African custom. When the Bechuanas are about to
found a new town, they observe an elaborate ritual. They choose
a bull from the herd, sew up its eyelids with sinew, and then allow
the blinded animal to wander at will for four days. On the fifth
day they track it down and sacrifice it at sunset on the spot where
it happens to be standing. The carcase is then roasted whole and
divided among the people. Ritual requires that every particle of
the flesh should be consumed on the spot. When the sacrificial
meal is over, the medicine-men take the hide and mark it with
appropriate medicines, the composition of which is a professional
secret. Then with one long spiral cut they convert the whole hide
into a single thong. Having done so they cut up the thong into
lengths of about two feet and despatch messengers in all directions
to peg down one of those strips in each of the paths leading to the
new town. <q>After this,</q> it is said, <q>if a foreigner approaches the
new town to destroy it with his charms, he will find that the town
has prepared itself for his coming.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. W. C. Willoughby, <q>Notes
on the Totemism of the Becwana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) pp. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus it would seem that the
pastoral Bechuanas attempt to place a new town under the protection
of one of their sacred cattle<note place='foot'>For more evidence of the sanctity
of cattle among the Bechuanas see the
Rev. W. C. Willoughby, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp.
301 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> by distributing pieces of its hide
at all points where an enemy could approach it, just as the Lydian
king thought to place the citadel of his capital under the protection
of the lion-god by carrying the animal round the boundaries.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The custom
may
explain
the legend
of the
foundation
of Carthage
and similar
tales.</note>
Further, the Bechuana custom may throw light on a widespread
legend which relates how a wily settler in a new country bought
from the natives as much land as could be covered with a hide, and
how he then proceeded to cut the hide into thongs and to claim
as much land as could be enclosed by the thongs. It was thus,
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
according to the Hottentots, that the first European settlers obtained
a footing in South Africa.<note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
d'Exploration au Nord-est de la Colonie
du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</hi> (Paris,
1842), p. 49.</note> But the most familiar example of such
stories is the tradition that Dido procured the site of Carthage
in this fashion, and that the place hence received the name of Byrsa
or <q>hide.</q><note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> i. 367 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, with the
commentary of Servius; Justin, xviii.
5. 9. Thongs cut from the hide of the
ox sacrificed to the four-handed Apollo
were given as prizes. See Hesychius,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> κυνακίας; compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, πυρώλοφοι.
Whether the Greek custom was related
to those discussed in the text seems
doubtful. I have to thank my colleague
and friend Professor R. C. Bosanquet
for calling my attention to these passages
of Hesychius.</note> Similar tales occur in the legendary history of Saxons
and Danes,<note place='foot'>Saxo Grammaticus, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Danica</hi>,
ix. vol. i. pp. 462 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. P.
E. Müller (Copenhagen, 1839-1858)
(where the hide employed is that of a
horse); J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
(Göttingen, 1881), pp. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare R. Köhler, <q>Sage von Landerwerbung
durch zerschnittene Häute,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Orient und Occident</hi>, iii. 185-187.</note> and they meet us in India, Siberia, Burma, Cambodia,
Java, and Bali.<note place='foot'>Lieutenant-Colonel James Tod,
<hi rend='italic'>Annals and Antiquities of Rajast'han</hi>,
ii. (London, 1832) p. 235; W. Radloff,
<hi rend='italic'>Proben der Volkslitteratur der
türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</hi>, iv.
(St. Petersburg, 1872) p. 179; A.
Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Voelker des oestlichen
Asien</hi> (Berlin, 1884-1889), i. 25, iv.
367 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; T. Stamford Raffles, <hi rend='italic'>History
of Java</hi> (London, 1817), ii. 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
R. van Eck, <q>Schetsen van het eiland
Bali,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
Feb. 1880, p. 117. The substance
of all these stories, except the
first, was given by me in a note on
<q>Hide-measured Lands,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Classical
Review</hi>, ii. (1888) p. 322.</note> The wide diffusion of such stories confirms the
conjecture of Jacob Grimm that in them we have a reminiscence
of a mode of land measurement which was once actually in use,
and of which the designation is still retained in the English <emph>hide</emph>.<note place='foot'>J. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</hi>,
pp. 538 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Bechuana custom suggests that the mode of measuring by
a hide may have originated in a practice of encompassing a piece of
land with thongs cut from the hide of a sacrificial victim in order to
place the ground under the guardianship of the sacred animal.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The ox
whose hide
is used is
blinded in
order that
the new
town
may be
invisible
to its
enemies.</note>
But why do the Bechuanas sew up the eyelids of the bull which
is to be used for this purpose? The answer appears to be given by
the ceremonies which the same people observe when they are going
out to war. On that occasion a woman rushes up to the army with
her eyes shut and shakes a winnowing-fan, while she cries out, <q>The
army is not seen! The army is not seen!</q> And a medicine-man
at the same time sprinkles medicine over the spears, crying out
in like manner, <q>The army is not seen! The army is not seen!</q>
After that they seize a bull, sew up its eyelids with a hair of its tail,
and drive it for some distance along the road which the army is to
take. When it has preceded the army a little way, the bull is sacrificed,
roasted whole, and eaten by the warriors. All the flesh must
be consumed on the spot. Such parts as cannot be eaten are burnt
with fire. Only the contents of the stomach are carefully preserved
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
as a charm which is to lead the warriors to victory. Chosen men
carry the precious guts in front of the army, and it is deemed most
important that no one should precede them. When they stop, the
army stops, and it will not resume the march till it sees that the
men with the bull's guts have gone forward.<note place='foot'>Rev. W. C. Willoughby, <q>Notes
on the Totemism of the Becwana,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxv. (1905) p. 304.</note> The meaning of these
ceremonies is explained by the cries of the woman and the priest,
<q>The army is not seen! The army is not seen!</q> Clearly it is
desirable that the army should not be perceived by the enemies
until it is upon them. Accordingly on the principles of homoeopathic
magic the Bechuanas apparently imagine that they can make themselves
invisible by eating of the flesh of a blind bull, blindness and
invisibility being to their simple minds the same thing. For the
same reason the bowels of the blind ox are carried in front of the
army to hide its advance from hostile eyes. In like manner the
custom of sacrificing and eating a blind ox on the place where
a new town is to be built may be intended to render the town
invisible to enemies. At all events the Bawenda, a South African
people who belong to the same Bantu stock as the Bechuanas, take
great pains to conceal their kraals from passers-by. The kraals are
built in the forest or bush, and the long winding footpaths which
lead to them are often kept open only by the support of a single
pole here and there. Indeed the paths are so low and narrow that
it is very difficult to bring a horse into such a village. In time
of war the poles are removed and the thorny creepers fall down,
forming a natural screen or bulwark which the enemy can neither
penetrate nor destroy by fire. The kraals are also surrounded by
walls of undressed stones with a filling of soil; and to hide them
still better from the view of the enemy the tops of the walls are
sown with Indian corn or planted with tobacco. Hence travellers
passing through the country seldom come across a Bawenda kraal.
To see where the Bawenda dwell you must climb to the tops of
mountains and look down on the roofs of their round huts peeping
out of the surrounding green like clusters of mushrooms in the
woods.<note place='foot'>Rev. E. Gottschling, <q>The Bawenda,
a Sketch of their History and
Customs,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xxxv. (1905) pp. 368 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The object which the Bawenda attain by these perfectly
rational means, the Bechuanas seek to compass by the sacrifice and
consumption of a blind bull.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>This explanation
of the
use of a
blinded ox
is confirmed
by
a Caffre
custom.</note>
This explanation of the use of a blinded ox in sacrifice is
confirmed by the reasons alleged by a Caffre for the observance of
a somewhat similar custom in purificatory ceremonies after a battle.
On these occasions the Bechuanas and other Caffre tribes of South
Africa kill a black ox and cut out the tip of its tongue, an eye,
a piece of the ham-string, and a piece of the principal sinew of the
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
shoulder. These parts are fried with certain herbs and rubbed into
the joints of the warriors. By cutting out the tongue of the ox they
think to prevent the enemy from wagging his tongue against them;
by severing the sinews of the ox they hope to cause the enemy's
sinews to fail him in the battle; and by removing the eye of the ox
they imagine that they prevent the enemy from casting a covetous
eye on their cattle.<note place='foot'>T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Relation d'un Voyage d'Exploration</hi>, pp.
561-565.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>IV. Some Customs Of The Pelew Islanders.</head>

<p>
We have seen that the state of society and religion among the Pelew
Islanders in modern times presents several points of similarity to
the condition of the peoples about the Eastern Mediterranean in
antiquity.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Here I propose briefly to call attention to certain other
customs of the Pelew Islanders which may serve to illustrate some of
the institutions discussed in this volume.
</p>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Priests dressed as Women.'/>
<head>§ 1. Priests dressed as Women.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In the
Pelew
Islands a
man who is
inspired by
a goddess
wears
female
attire and
is treated
as a
woman.
This pretended
change of
sex under
the inspiration
of a
female
spirit may
explain a
widespread
custom
whereby
men dress
and live
like
women.</note>
In the Pelew Islands it often happens that a goddess chooses
a man, not a woman, for her minister and inspired mouthpiece.
When that is so, the favoured man is thenceforth regarded and
treated as a woman. He wears female attire, he carries a piece of
gold on his neck, he labours like a woman in the taro fields, and he
plays his new part so well that he earns the hearty contempt of his
fellows.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <q>Die Religion der
Pelauer,</q> in A. Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde</hi> (Berlin,
1888), i. 35.</note> The pretended change of sex under the inspiration of a
female spirit perhaps explains a custom widely spread among
savages, in accordance with which some men dress as women and
act as women through life. These unsexed creatures often, perhaps
generally, profess the arts of sorcery and healing, they communicate
with spirits, and are regarded sometimes with awe and sometimes
with contempt, as beings of a higher or lower order than common
folk. Often they are dedicated and trained to their vocation
from childhood. Effeminate sorcerers or priests of this sort are
found among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo,<note place='foot'>C. A. L. M. Schwaner, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1853), i. 186; M. T. H.
Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Beschrijving
der Dajaks</hi> (Zalt-Bommel, 1870), pp.
32-35; Captain Rodney Mundy, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative
of Events in Borneo and
Celebes from the Journals of James
Brooke, Esq., Rajah of Sarawak</hi>
(London, 1848), ii. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Charles
Brooke, <hi rend='italic'>Ten Years in Sarawak</hi> (London,
1866), ii. 280; H. Low,
<hi rend='italic'>Sarawak</hi> (London, 1848), pp. 174-177;
The Bishop of Labuan, <q>On the Wild
Tribes of the North-West Coast of
Borneo,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnological
Society of London</hi>, N.S. ii.
(1863) pp. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Spenser St. John,
<hi rend='italic'>Life in the Forests of the Far East</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
(London, 1863), i. 73. In Sarawak
these men are called <foreign rend='italic'>manangs</foreign>, in Dutch
Borneo they are called <foreign rend='italic'>bazirs</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>bassirs</foreign>.</note> the Bugis of South
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
Celebes,<note place='foot'>Captain R. Mundy, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 82
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Over de Bissoes of
heidensche Priesters en Priesteressen
der Boeginezen</hi> (Amsterdam, 1872),
pp. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> the Patagonians of South America,<note place='foot'>Th. Falkner, <hi rend='italic'>Description of Patagonia</hi>
(Hereford, 1774), p. 117; J.
Hutchinson, <q>The Tehuelche Indians
of Patagonia,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the
Ethnological Society of London</hi>, N.S.
vii. (1869) p. 323. Among the
Guaycurus of Southern Brazil there is
a class of men who dress as women and
do only women's work, such as spinning,
weaving, and making pottery. But so
far as I know, they are not said to be
sorcerers or priests. See C. F. Ph. v.
Martius, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Ethnographie Amerikas
zumal Brasiliens</hi> (Leipsic, 1867), pp.
74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and the Aleutians and
many Indian tribes of North America.<note place='foot'>G. H. von Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um
die Welt</hi> (Frankfort, 1812), ii. 43;
H. J. Holmberg, <q>Über die Völker
des Russischen Amerika,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Acta Societatis
Scientiarum Fennicae</hi>, iv. (Helsingfors,
1856) pp. 400 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. H. Dall,
<hi rend='italic'>Alaska</hi> (London, 1870), pp. 402 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Ross Cox, <hi rend='italic'>The Columbia River</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (London,
1832), i. 327 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Father G. Boscana,
<q>Chinigchinich,</q> in [A. Robinson's]
<hi rend='italic'>Life in California</hi> (New York, 1846),
pp. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; S. Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of
California</hi> (Washington, 1877), pp.
132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. H. Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native
Races of the Pacific States</hi> (London,
1875-1876), i. 82, 92, 415, 585, 774;
Hontan, <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de l'Amérique
Septentrionale</hi> (Amsterdam, 1705), p.
144; J. F. Lafitau, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs des Sauvages
Amériquains</hi> (Paris, 1724), i. 52-54;
Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de la Nouvelle
France</hi> (Paris, 1744), vi. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W.
H. Keating, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition to the Source
of St. Peter's River</hi> (London, 1825),
i. 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 436; George Catlin, <hi rend='italic'>North
American Indians</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (London, 1844),
ii. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Maximilian Prinz zu Wied,
<hi rend='italic'>Reise in das innere Nord-America</hi>
(Coblentz, 1839-1841), ii. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
D. G. Brinton, <hi rend='italic'>The Lenâpé and their
Legends</hi> (Philadelphia, 1885), pp. 109
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. G. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der
amerikanischen Urreligionen</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Bâle,
167), pp. 44 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 418. Among the
tribes which permitted the custom were
the Illinois, Mandans, Dacotas (Sioux),
Sauks, and Foxes, to the east of the
Rocky Mountains, the Yukis, Pomos,
and Pitt River Indians of California,
and the Koniags of Alaska.</note> In the island of Rambree, off
the coast of Aracan, a set of vagabond <q>conjurors,</q> who dressed and
lived as women, used to dance round a tall pole, invoking the aid of
their favourite idol on the occasion of any calamity.<note place='foot'>Lieut. W. Foley, <q>Journal of a
Tour through the Island of Rambree,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</hi>,
iv. (Calcutta, 1835) p. 199.</note> Male members
of the Vallabha sect in India often seek to win the favour of the god
Krishna, whom they specially revere, by wearing their hair long and
assimilating themselves to women; even their spiritual chiefs, the
so-called Maharajas, sometimes simulate the appearance of women
when they lead the worship of their followers.<note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Life
and Thought in India</hi> (London, 1883),
p. 136. Compare J. A. Dubois,
<hi rend='italic'>Mœurs, Institutions, et Cérémonies des
Peuples de l'Inde</hi> (Paris, 1825), i. 439.</note> In Madagascar we
hear of effeminate men who wore female attire and acted as women,
thinking thereby to do God service.<note place='foot'>O. Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 467.</note> In the kingdom of Congo
there was a sacrificial priest who commonly dressed as a woman and
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
gloried in the title of the Grandmother. The post of Grandmother
must have been much coveted, for the incumbent might not be put
to death, whatever crimes or rascalities he committed; and to
do him justice he appears commonly to have taken full advantage
of this benefit of clergy. When he died, his fortunate successor
dissected the body of the deceased Grandmother, extracting his
heart and other vital organs, and amputating his fingers and toes,
which he kept as priceless relics, and sold as sovereign remedies
for all the ills that flesh is heir to.<note place='foot'>J. B. Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique
de l'Éthiopie Occidentale</hi> (Paris, 1732),
ii. 195-199. Wherever men regularly
dress as women, we may suspect that
a superstitious motive underlies the
custom even though our authorities do
not mention it. The custom is thus
reported among the Italmenes of
Kamtschatka (G. W. Steller, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
von dem Lande Kamtschatka</hi>,
Frankfort and Leipsic, 1774, pp. 350
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>), the Lhoosais of South-Eastern
India (Capt. T. H. Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Races
of South-Eastern India</hi>, London, 1870,
p. 255), and the Nogay or Mongutay
of the Caucasus (J. Reinegg, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung
des Kaukasus</hi>, St. Petersburg,
Gotha, and Hildesheim, 1796-1797,
i. 270). Among the Lhoosais or
Lushais not only do men sometimes
dress like women and consort and
work with them (T. H. Lewin,
<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>), but, on the other hand, women
sometimes dress and live like men,
adopting masculine habits in all
respects. When one of these unsexed
women was asked her reasons for
adopting a masculine mode of life, she
at first denied that she was a woman,
but finally confessed <q>that her <foreign rend='italic'>khuavang</foreign>
was not good, and so she became
a man.</q> See the extract from the
<hi rend='italic'>Pioneer Mail</hi> of May 1890, quoted in
<hi rend='italic'>The Indian Antiquary</hi>, xxxii. (1903)
p. 413. The permanent transformation
of women into men seems to be
much rarer than the converse change
of men into women.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Such transformations
seem to
have been
often
carried out
in obedience
to
intimations
received in
dreams or
in ecstasy. Transformed
medicine-men
among the
Sea Dyaks and Chukchees.</note>
We may conjecture that in many of these cases the call to this
strange form of the religious life came in the shape of a dream or
vision, in which the dreamer or visionary imagined himself to be
a woman or to be possessed by a female spirit; for with many
savage races the disordered fancies of sleep or ecstasy are accepted
as oracular admonitions which it would be perilous to disregard.
At all events we are told that a dream or a revelation of some sort
was the reason which in North America these men-women commonly
alleged for the life they led; it had been thus brought home
to them, they said, that their medicine or their salvation lay in
living as women, and when once they had got this notion into their
head nothing could drive it out again. Many an Indian father
attempted by persuasion, by bribes, by violence, to deter his son from
obeying the mysterious call, but all to no purpose.<note place='foot'>Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, <hi rend='italic'>Reise
in das innere Nord-America</hi>, ii. 133.</note> Among the
Sauks, an Indian tribe of North America, these effeminate beings
were always despised, but sometimes they were pitied <q>as labouring
under an unfortunate destiny which they cannot avoid, being
supposed to be impelled to this course by a vision from the female
spirit that resides in the moon.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Keating, <hi rend='italic'>Expedition to
the Source of St. Peter's River</hi>, i. 227
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly the Omahas, another
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
Indian tribe of North America, <q>believe that the unfortunate beings,
called <foreign rend='italic'>Min-qu-ga</foreign>, are mysterious or sacred because they have been
affected by the Moon Being. When a young Omaha fasted for
the first time on reaching puberty, it was thought that the Moon
Being appeared to him, holding in one hand a bow and arrows and
in the other a pack strap, such as the Indian women use. When
the youth tried to grasp the bow and arrows the Moon Being
crossed his hands very quickly, and if the youth was not very careful
he seized the pack strap instead of the bow and arrows, thereby
fixing his lot in after life. In such a case he could not help acting
the woman, speaking, dressing, and working just as Indian women
used to do.</q><note place='foot'>Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, <q>A Study
of Siouan Cults,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eleventh Annual
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</hi>
(Washington, 1894), p. 378.</note> Among the Ibans or Sea Dyaks of Borneo the
highest class of sorcerers or medicine-men (<foreign rend='italic'>manangs</foreign>) are those who
are believed to have been transformed into women. Such a man is
therefore called a <q>changed medicine-man</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>manang bali</foreign>) on
account of his supposed change of sex. The call to transform himself
into a woman is said to come as a supernatural command thrice
repeated in dreams; to disregard the command would mean death.
Accordingly he makes a feast, sacrifices a pig or two to avert evil
consequences from the tribe, and then assumes the garb of a woman.
Thenceforth he is treated as a woman and occupies himself in
feminine pursuits. His chief aim is to copy female manners and
habits as accurately as possible. He is employed for the same
purposes as an ordinary medicine-man and his methods are similar,
but he is paid much higher fees and is often called in when others
have been unable to effect a cure.<note place='foot'>E. H. Gomes, <hi rend='italic'>Seventeen Years
among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo</hi> (London,
1911), p. 179; Ch. Hose and
W. McDougall, <hi rend='italic'>The Pagan Tribes of
Borneo</hi> (London, 1912), ii. 116.</note> Similarly among the Chukchees
of North-Eastern Asia there are shamans or medicine-men
who assimilate themselves as far as possible to women, and who are
believed to be called to this vocation by spirits in a dream. The
call usually comes at the critical age of early youth when the
shamanistic inspiration, as it is called, first manifests itself. But the
call is much dreaded by the youthful adepts, and some of them
prefer death to obedience. There are, however, various stages or
degrees of transformation. In the first stage the man apes a
woman only in the manner of braiding and arranging the hair of his
head. In the second he dons female attire; in the third stage he
adopts as far as possible the life and characteristics of the female
sex. A young man who is undergoing this final transformation
abandons all masculine occupations and manners. He throws away
the rifle and the lance, the lasso of the reindeer herdsman, and the
harpoon of the seal-hunter, and betakes himself to the needle and
the skin-scraper instead. He learns the use of them quickly,
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
because the spirits are helping him all the time. Even his pronunciation
changes from the male to the female mode. At the
same time his body alters, if not in outward appearance, at least in
its faculties and forces. He loses masculine strength, fleetness of
foot, endurance in wrestling, and falls into the debility and helplessness
of a woman. Even his mental character undergoes a change.
His old brute courage and fighting spirit are gone; he grows shy and
bashful before strangers, fond of small talk and of dandling little
children. In short he becomes a woman with the appearance of a
man, and as a woman he is often taken to wife by another man,
with whom he leads a regular married life. Extraordinary powers
are attributed to such transformed shamans. They are supposed to
enjoy the special protection of spirits who play the part of supernatural
husbands to them. Hence they are much dreaded even by
their colleagues in the profession who remain mere men; hence,
too, they excel in all branches of magic, including ventriloquism.<note place='foot'>Waldemar Bogoras, <hi rend='italic'>The Chukchee</hi>
(Leyden and New York, 1904-1909),
pp. 448-453 (<hi rend='italic'>The Jesup North Pacific
Expedition</hi>, vol. vii.; <hi rend='italic'>Memoir of
the American Museum of Natural
History</hi>).</note>
Among the Teso of Central Africa medicine-men often dress as
women and wear feminine ornaments, such as heavy chains of beads
and shells round their heads and necks.<note place='foot'>Rev. A. L. Kitching, <hi rend='italic'>On the
Backwaters of the Nile</hi> (London, 1912),
p. 239, with the plate.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Women
inspired
by a god
dress as
men.</note>
And just as a man inspired by a goddess may adopt female
attire, so conversely a woman inspired by a god may adopt male
costume. In Uganda the great god Mukasa, the deity of the Victoria
Nyanza Lake and of abundance, imparted his oracles through a
woman, who in ordinary life dressed like the rest of her sex in a
bark cloth wrapped round the body and fastened with a girdle, so as
to leave the arms and shoulders bare; but when she prophesied under
the inspiration of the god, she wore two bark cloths knotted in masculine
style over her shoulders and crossing each other on her breast and
back.<note place='foot'>For this information I have to
thank my friend the Rev. J. Roscoe.
He tells me that according to tradition
Mukasa used to give his oracles by the
mouth of a man, not of a woman. To
wear two bark cloths, one on each
shoulder, is a privilege of royalty and
of priests. The ordinary man wears a
single bark cloth knotted on one
shoulder only. With the single exception
mentioned in the text, women in
Uganda never wear bark cloths fastened
over the shoulders.</note> When once the god had chosen her, she retained office for life;
she might not marry or converse with any man except one particular
priest, who was always present when she was possessed by the deity.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Roscoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Baganda</hi>
(London, 1911), p. 297.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
theory of
inspiration
by a female
spirit
perhaps
explains
the legends
of the
effeminate
Sardanapalus
and the
effeminate
Hercules,
both of
whom may
have been
thought
to be
possessed
by the
great
Asiatic
goddess
Astarte
or her
equivalent.</note>
Perhaps this assumed change of sex under the inspiration of
a goddess may give the key to the legends of the effeminate
Sardanapalus and the effeminate Hercules,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi>, pp. 387 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> as well as to the practice
of the effeminate priests of Cybele and the Syrian goddess. In all
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
such cases the pretended transformation of a man into a woman
would be intelligible if we supposed that the womanish priest or king
thought himself animated by a female spirit, whose sex, accordingly,
he felt bound to imitate. Certainly the eunuch priests of Cybele
seem to have bereft themselves of their manhood under the
supposed inspiration of the Great Goddess.<note place='foot'>Catullus, lxiii. This is in substance
the explanation of the custom
given by Dr. L. R. Farnell, who
observes that <q>the mad worshipper
endeavoured thus against nature to
assimilate himself more closely to his
goddess</q> (<q>Sociological hypotheses
concerning the position of women in
ancient religion,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</hi>,
vii. (1904) p. 93). The
theory is not necessarily inconsistent
with my conjecture as to the magical
use made of the severed parts. See
above, vol. i. pp. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The priest of Hercules
at Antimachia, in Cos, who dressed as a woman when he offered
sacrifice, is said to have done so in imitation of Hercules who
disguised himself as a woman to escape the pursuit of his enemies.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Graecae</hi>, 58.</note>
So the Lydian Hercules wore female attire when he served for
three years as the purchased slave of the imperious Omphale,
Queen of Lydia.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, ii. 6. 2
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Athenaeus, xii. 11, pp. 515 <hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi>-516
<hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 31;
Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De magistratibus</hi>, iii.
64; Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Dialogi deorum</hi>, xiii. 2;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Heroides</hi>, ix. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Statius,
<hi rend='italic'>Theb.</hi> x. 646-649.</note> If we suppose that Queen Omphale, like Queen
Semiramis, was nothing but the great Asiatic goddess,<note place='foot'>On Semiramis in this character see
above, vol. i. pp. 176 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The Scapegoat</hi>,
pp. 369 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> or one of
her Avatars, it becomes probable that the story of the womanish
Hercules of Lydia preserves a reminiscence of a line or college of
effeminate priests who, like the eunuch priests of the Syrian goddess,
dressed as women in imitation of their goddess and were supposed
to be inspired by her. The probability is increased by the practice
of the priests of Hercules at Antimachia, in Cos, who, as we have just
seen, actually wore female attire when they were engaged in their sacred
duties. Similarly at the vernal mysteries of Hercules in Rome the men
were draped in the garments of women;<note place='foot'>Joannes Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iv.
46, p. 81, ed. I. Bekker (Bonn, 1837).
Yet at Rome, by an apparent contradiction,
women might not be present
at a sacrifice offered to Hercules
(Propertius, v. 9. 67-70; see further
above, vol. i. p. 113, note 1), and
at Gades women might not enter
the temple of Melcarth, the Tyrian
Hercules (Silius Italicus, iii. 22).
There was a Greek proverb, <q>A
woman does not go to a temple
of Hercules</q> (Macarius, <hi rend='italic'>Cent.</hi> iii. 11;
<hi rend='italic'>Paroemiographi Graeci</hi>, ed. Leutsch et
Schneidewin, i. 392, ii. 154). Roman
women did not swear by Hercules
(Aulus Gellius, xi. 6).</note> and in some of the rites
and processions of Dionysus also men wore female attire.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Calumniae non temere credendum</hi>,
16; Hesychius and Suidas,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἰθύφαλλοι. At the Athenian vintage
festival of the Oschophoria a chorus
of singers was led in procession by two
young men dressed exactly like girls;
they carried branches of vines laden with
ripe clusters. The procession was said
to be in honour of Dionysus and Athena
or Ariadne. See Proclus, quoted by
Photius, <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca</hi>, p. 322<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, ed. I.
Bekker (Berlin, 1824); Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Theseus</hi>, 23.</note> In
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
legend and art there are clear traces of an effeminate Dionysus, who
perhaps figured in a strange ceremony for the artificial fertilization of
the fig.<note place='foot'>Clement of Alexandria, <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii.
34, pp. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ed. Potter; Arnobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Adversus Nationes</hi>, v. 28; <hi rend='italic'>Mythographi
Graeci</hi>, ed. A. Westermann (Brunswick,
1843), p. 368; J. Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Scholia on
Lycophron</hi>, 212. As to the special
association of the fig with Dionysus, see
Athenaeus, iii. 14, p. 78. As to the
artificial fertilization of the fig, see <hi rend='italic'>The
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</hi>,
ii. 314 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the type of the effeminate
Dionysus in art see E. Thraemer,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Dionysos,</q> in W. H. Roscher's
<hi rend='italic'>Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</hi>,
i. 1135 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Among the Nahanarvals, an ancient German tribe, a priest
garbed as a woman presided over a sacred grove.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, 43. Perhaps,
as Professor Chadwick thinks, this priest
may have succeeded to a priestess when
the change from mother-kin to father-kin
took place. See H. M. Chadwick,
<hi rend='italic'>The Origin of the English Nation</hi>
(Cambridge, 1907), p. 339.</note> These and similar
practices<note place='foot'>In Cyprus there was a bearded and
masculine image of Venus (probably
Astarte) in female attire: according to
Philochorus, the deity thus represented
was the moon, and sacrifices were
offered to him or her by men clad as
women, and by women clad as men.
See Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> iii. 7. 2 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> ii. 632. A
similar exchange of garments took
place between Argive men and women
at the festival of the Hybristica, which
fell in the month of Hermes, either at
the new moon or on the fourth of the
month. See Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De mulierum
virtutibus</hi>, 4; Polyaenus, viii. 33. On
the thirteenth of January flute-players
paraded the streets of Rome in the
garb of women (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones
Romanae</hi>, 55).</note> need not necessarily have any connexion with the social
system of mother-kin. Wherever a goddess is revered and the theory
of inspiration is held, a man may be thought to be possessed by a
female spirit, whether society be organized on mother-kin or on
father-kin. Still the chances of such a transformation of sex will
be greater under mother-kin than under father-kin if, as we have
found reason to believe, a system of mother-kin is more favourable
to the development and multiplication of goddesses than of gods.
It is therefore, perhaps, no mere accident that we meet with these
effeminate priests in regions like the Pelew Islands and Western
Asia, where the system of mother-kin either actually prevails or has
at least left traces of it behind in tradition and custom. Such
traces, for example, are to be found in Lydia and Cos,<note place='foot'>For traces of mother-kin in Lydia
see <hi rend='italic'>The Magic Art and the Evolution
of Kings</hi>, ii. 281 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> With regard to
Cos we know from inscriptions that at
Halasarna all who shared in the sacred
rites of Apollo and Hercules had to
register the names of their father, their
mother, and of their mother's father;
from which it appears that maternal
descent was counted more important
than paternal descent. See H. Collitz
und F. Bechtel, <hi rend='italic'>Sammlung der griechischen
Dialekt-Inschriften</hi>, iii. 1
(Göttingen, 1899), pp. 382-393, Nos.
3705, 3706; G. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge
Inscriptionum Graecarnum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> vol. ii. pp.
396 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No. 614; Ch. Michel,
<hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</hi>, pp.
796 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, No. 1003; J. Toepffer,
<hi rend='italic'>Attische Genealogie</hi> (Berlin, 1889), pp.
192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On traces of mother-kin in
the legend and ritual of Hercules see
A. B. Cook, <q>Who was the wife of
Hercules?</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Classical Review</hi>, xx.
(1906) pp. 376 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mr. Cook conjectures
that a Sacred Marriage of
Hercules and Hera was celebrated in
Cos. We know in fact from a Coan
inscription that a bed was made and a
marriage celebrated beside the image
of Hercules, and it seems probable that
the rite was that of a Sacred Marriage,
though some scholars interpret it merely
of an ordinary human wedding. See
G. Dittenberger, <hi rend='italic'>Sylloge Inscriptionum
Graecarum</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> vol. ii. pp. 577 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, No.
734; R. Dareste, B. Haussoulier, Th.
Reinach, <hi rend='italic'>Recueil d'Inscriptions Juridiques
Grecques</hi>, Deuxième Série
(Paris, 1898), No. xxiv. B, pp. 94
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Fr. Back, <hi rend='italic'>De Graecorum caerimoniis
in quibus homines deorum
vice fungebantur</hi> (Berlin, 1883), pp.
14-24.</note> in both of
which the effeminate Hercules had his home.
</p>

<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But the
exchange
of costume
between
men and
women has
probably
been practised
also
from other
motives, for
example,
from a wish
to avert the
Evil Eye.
This
motive
seems to
explain
the interchange
of
male and
female
costume
between
bride and
bridegroom
at
marriage.</note>
But the religious or superstitious interchange of dress between
men and women is an obscure and complex problem, and it is
unlikely that any single solution would apply to all the cases.
Probably the custom has been practised from many different
motives. For example, the practice of dressing boys as girls has
certainly been sometimes adopted to avert the Evil Eye;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. (1884)
§§ 219, 869, 1007, 1029; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> ii. (1885)
§§ 344, 561, 570; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Society of Bombay</hi>, i.
(1886) p. 123; <hi rend='italic'>North Indian Notes
and Queries</hi>, iii. (1893) § 99. Compare
my notes, <q>The Youth of Achilles,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>The Classical Review</hi>, vii. (1893) pp.
292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; and on Pausanias, i. 22. 6
(vol. ii. p. 266).</note> and it is
possible that the custom of changing garments at marriage, the
bridegroom disguising himself as a woman, or the bride disguising
herself as a man, may have been resorted to for the same purpose.
Thus in Cos, where the priest of Hercules wore female attire, the
bridegroom was in like manner dressed as a woman when he received
his bride.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaestiones Graecae</hi>, 58.</note> Spartan brides had their hair shaved, and were clad in
men's clothes and booted on their wedding night.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Lycurgus</hi>, 15.</note> Argive brides
wore false beards when they slept with their husbands for the first
time.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De mulierum virtutibus</hi>,
4.</note> In Southern Celebes a bridegroom at a certain point of the
long and elaborate marriage ceremonies puts on the garments which
his bride has just put off.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi> (The
Hague, 1875), p. 35. The marriage
ceremonies here described are especially
those of princes.</note> Among the Jews of Egypt in the Middle
Ages the bride led the wedding dance with a helmet on her head
and a sword in her hand, while the bridegroom adorned himself as
a woman and put on female attire.<note place='foot'>Sepp, <hi rend='italic'>Altbayerischer Sagenschatz</hi>
(Munich, 1876), p. 232, referring to
Maimonides.</note> At a Brahman marriage in
Southern India <q>the bride is dressed up as a boy, and another girl
is dressed up to represent the bride. They are taken in procession
through the street, and, on returning, the pseudo-bridegroom is
made to speak to the real bridegroom in somewhat insolent
tones, and some mock play is indulged in. The real bridegroom
is addressed as if he was the syce (groom) or gumasta (clerk)
of the pseudo-bridegroom, and is sometimes treated as a thief,
and judgment passed on him by the latter.</q><note place='foot'>E. Thurston, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographic Notes
in Southern India</hi> (Madras, 1906), p. 3.
The pseudo-bridegroom is apparently
the bride in masculine attire.</note> Among the Bharias
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
of the Central Provinces of India <q>the bridegroom puts on
women's ornaments and carries with him an iron nut-cutter or dagger
to keep off evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, iii. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Forest
Tribes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 31.</note> Similarly among the Khangars, a low
Hindustani caste of the same region, <q>the bridegroom is dressed
in a yellow gown and overcloth, with trousers of red chintz, red
shoes, and a marriage crown of date-palm leaves. He has the
silver ornaments usually worn by women on his neck, as the <foreign rend='italic'>khang-wāri</foreign>
or silver ring and the <foreign rend='italic'>hamel</foreign> or necklace of rupees. In order
to avert the evil eye he carries a dagger or nut-cracker, and a smudge
of lampblack is made on his forehead to disfigure him and thus
avert the evil eye, which, it is thought, would otherwise be too probably
attracted by his exquisitely beautiful appearance in his wedding
garments.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, i. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Hindustani
Castes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 48.</note> These examples render it highly probable that, like
the dagger or nut-cracker which he holds in his hand, the woman's
ornaments which he wears are intended to protect the bridegroom
against demons or the evil eye at this critical moment of his life, the
protection apparently consisting in a disguise which enables him to
elude the unwelcome attentions of malignant beings.<note place='foot'>Elsewhere I have conjectured that
the wearing of female attire by the
bridegroom at marriage may mark a
transition from mother-kin to father-kin,
the intention of the custom being
to transfer to the father those rights
over the children which had previously
been enjoyed by the mother alone.
See <hi rend='italic'>Totemism</hi> (Edinburgh, 1887), pp.
78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Totemism and Exogamy</hi>, i.
73. But I am now disposed to think
that the other explanation suggested
in the text is the more probable.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The same
explanation
may
account for
the interchange
of male
and female
costume
between
other
persons at
marriage.</note>
A similar explanation probably accounts for the similar exchange
of costume between other persons than the bride and bridegroom at
marriage. For example, after a Bharia wedding, <q>the girl's mother
gets the dress of the boy's father and puts it on, together with a
false beard and moustaches, and dances holding a wooden ladle
in one hand and a packet of ashes in the other. Every time she
approaches the bridegroom's father on her rounds she spills some
of the ashes over him and occasionally gives him a crack on the
head with her ladle, these actions being accompanied by bursts of
laughter from the party and frenzied playing by the musicians.
When the party reach the bridegroom's house on their return, his
mother and the other women come out, and burn a little mustard
and human hair in a lamp, the unpleasant smell emitted by these
articles being considered potent to drive away evil spirits.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, iii. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Forest
Tribes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 31.</note> Again,
after a Khangar wedding the father of the bridegroom, dressed in
women's clothes, dances with the mother of the bride, while the two
throw turmeric mixed with water on each other.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, iii. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Forest
Tribes</hi> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 48.</note> Similarly after a
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
wedding of the Bharbhunjas, another Hindustani caste of the
Central Provinces, the bridegroom's father dances before the family
in women's clothes which have been supplied by the bride's father.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Central Provinces, Ethnographic
Survey</hi>, vi. <hi rend='italic'>Draft Articles on Hindustani
Castes</hi>, Second Series (Allahabad,
1911), p. 50.</note>
Such disguises and dances may be intended either to protect the
disguised dancer himself against the evil eye or perhaps rather to
guard the principal personages of the ceremony, the bride and bridegroom,
by diverting the attention of demons from them to the guiser.<note place='foot'>Compare W. Crooke, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Religion
and Folk-lore of Northern India</hi>
(Westminster, 1896), ii. 8, who proposes,
with great probability, to explain
on a similar principle, the European
marriage custom known as the False
Bride. For more instances of the
interchange of male and female costume
at marriage between persons other than
the bridegroom see Capt. J. S. King,
<q>Social Customs of the Western
Somali Tribes,</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore Journal</hi>,
vi. (1888) p. 122; J. P. Farler, <q>The
Usambara Country in East Africa,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Geographical
Society</hi>, N.S. i. (1879) p. 92; Major
J. Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</hi>
(Calcutta, 1880), pp. 78, 80; G. A.
Grierson, <hi rend='italic'>Bihar Peasant Life</hi> (Calcutta,
1885), p. 365; A. de Gubernatis, <hi rend='italic'>Usi
Nuziali in Italia</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Milan, 1878), p.
190; P. Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes Populaires
de la Haute-Bretagne</hi> (Paris, 1886),
p. 438.</note>
However, when at marriage the bride alone assumes the costume
and appearance of the other sex, the motive for the disguise may
perhaps be a notion that on the principle of homoeopathic magic
she thereby ensures the birth of a male heir. Similarly in Sweden
there is a popular superstition that <q>on the night preceding her
nuptials the bride should have a baby-boy to sleep with her, in which
case her first-born will be a son</q>;<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>
(London, 1870), p. 85.</note> and among the Kabyles, when
a bride dismounts from her mule at her husband's house, a young
lad leaps into the saddle before she touches the ground, in order
that her first child may be a boy.<note place='foot'>J. Liorel, <hi rend='italic'>Kabylie du Jurjura</hi>
(Paris, <hi rend='smallcaps'>n. d.</hi>), p. 406.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Women's
dress
assumed
by men
for the
purpose of
deceiving
demons
and ghosts.</note>
Be that as it may, there is no doubt that the assumption of
woman's dress is sometimes intended to disguise a man for the
purpose of deceiving a demon. Thus among the Boloki or Bangala
on the Upper Congo a man was long afflicted with an internal
malady. When all other remedies had failed, a witch-doctor informed
the sufferer that the cause of his trouble was an evil spirit,
and that the best thing he could do was to go far away where the
devil could not get at him, and to remain there till he had recovered
his health. The patient followed the prescription. At dead of
night he left his house, taking only two of his wives with him and
telling no one of his destination, lest the demon should hear it and
follow him. So he went far away from his town, donned a woman's
dress, and speaking in a woman's voice he pretended to be other
than he was, in order that the devil should not be able to find him
at his new address. Strange to say, these sage measures failed to
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
effect a cure, and wearying of exile he at last returned home, where
he continued to dress and speak as a woman.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <hi rend='italic'>Among Congo
Cannibals</hi> (London, 1913), p. 267.
Compare <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Anthropological Notes
on the Bangala of the Upper Congo
River,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Anthropological
Institute</hi>, xl. (1910) pp. 370 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, the Kuki-Lushai
of Assam believe that if a man kills an enemy or a wild
beast, the ghost of the dead man or animal will haunt him and drive
him mad. The only way of averting this catastrophe is to dress up
as a woman and pretend to be one. For example, a man who had
shot a tiger and was in fear of being haunted by the animal's ghost,
dressed himself up in a woman's petticoat and cloth, wore ivory
earrings, and wound a mottled cloth round his head like a turban.
Then smoking a woman's pipe, carrying a little basket, and spinning
a cotton spindle, he paraded the village followed by a crowd roaring
and shrieking with laughter, while he preserved the gravity of a
judge, for a single smile would have been fatal. To guard against
the possibility of unseasonable mirth, he carried a porcupine in
his arms, and if ever, tickled beyond the pitch of endurance, he
burst into a guffaw, the crowd said, <q>It was the porcupine that
laughed.</q> All this was done to mortify the pride of the tiger's ghost
by leading him to believe that he had been shot by a woman.<note place='foot'>Lieut.-Colonel J. Shakespear,
<q>The Kuki-Lushai Clans,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Royal Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xxxix. (1909) pp. 380 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Exchange
of costume
between
the sexes
at circumcision.</note>
The same dread of attracting the attention of dangerous spirits
at critical times perhaps explains the custom observed by some East
African tribes of wearing the costume of the opposite sex at circumcision.
Thus, when Masai boys have been circumcised they dress
as women, wearing earrings in their ears and long garments that
reach to the ground. They also whiten their swarthy faces with
chalk. This costume they retain till their wounds are healed,
whereupon they are shaved and assume the skins and ornaments
of warriors.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Masai</hi> (Oxford,
1905), p. 298.</note> Among the Nandi, a tribe of British East Africa,
before boys are circumcised they receive a visit from young girls,
who give them some of their own garments and ornaments. These
the boys put on and wear till the operation of circumcision is over,
when they exchange the girls' clothes for the garments of women,
which, together with necklaces, are provided for them by their
mothers; and these women's garments the newly circumcised lads
must continue to wear for months afterwards. Girls are also circumcised
among the Nandi, and before they submit to the operation
they attire themselves in men's garments and carry clubs in their
hands.<note place='foot'>A. C. Hollis, <hi rend='italic'>The Nandi</hi> (Oxford,
1909), pp. 53-58. Mr. Hollis informs
me that among the Akikuyu, another
tribe of British East Africa, the custom
of boys dressing as girls at or after
circumcision is also observed.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Other cases
of the interchange
of
male and
female
costume.</note>
If such interchange of costume between men and women is
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
intended to disguise the wearers against demons, we may compare
the practice of the Lycian men, who regularly wore women's dress
in mourning;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Consolatio ad Apollonium</hi>,
22; Valerius Maximus, ii. 6. 13.</note> for this might be intended to conceal them from the
ghost, just as perhaps for a similar reason some peoples of antiquity
used to descend into pits and remain there for several days, shunning
the light of the sun, whenever a death had taken place in the family.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
A similar desire to deceive spirits may perhaps explain a device to
which the Loeboes, a primitive tribe of Sumatra, resort when they
wish to obtain male or female offspring. If parents have several
sons and desire that the next child shall be a girl, they dress the
boys as girls, cut their hair after the girlish fashion, and hang necklaces
round their necks. On the contrary, when they have many
daughters and wish to have a son, they dress the girls up as boys.<note place='foot'>J. Kreemer, <q>De Loeboes in
Mandailing,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>,
lxvi. (1912) p. 317.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Conclusion.</note>
On the whole we conclude that the custom of men dressing as
women and of women dressing as men has been practised from a
variety of superstitious motives, among which the principal would
seem to be the wish to please certain powerful spirits or to deceive
others.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Prostitution of Unmarried Girls,'/>
<head>§ 2. Prostitution of Unmarried Girls.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
systematic
prostitution
of
unmarried
girls for
hire in the
Pelew
Islands
seems to
be a form
of sexual
communism
and
of group-marriage.</note>
Like many peoples of Western Asia in antiquity, the Pelew
Islanders systematically prostitute their unmarried girls for hire.
Hence, just as in Lydia and Cyprus of old, the damsels are a
source of income to their family, and women wait impatiently for
the time when their young daughters will be able to help the household
by their earnings. Indeed the mother regularly anticipates the
time by depriving the girl of her virginity with her own hands.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, pp. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Hence the theory that the prostitution of unmarried girls is a device
to destroy their virginity without risk to their husbands is just as
inapplicable to the Pelew Islanders as we have seen it to be to
the peoples of Western Asia in antiquity. When a Pelew girl has
thus been prepared for her vocation by her mother, she sells her
favours to all the men of her village who can pay for them and
who do not belong to her own exogamous clan; but she never
grants her favours to the same man twice. Accordingly in every
village of the Pelew Islands it may be taken as certain that the
men and women know each other carnally, except that members
of the same clan are debarred from each other by the rule of
exogamy.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 51.</note> Thus a well-marked form of sexual communism, limited
only by the exogamous prohibitions which attach to the clans, prevails
among these people. Nor is this communism restricted to the inhabitants
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
of the same village, for the girls of each village are regularly
sent away to serve as prostitutes (<foreign rend='italic'>armengols</foreign>) in another village. There
they live with the men of one of the many clubs or associations
(<foreign rend='italic'>kaldebekels</foreign>) in the clubhouse (<foreign rend='italic'>blay</foreign>), attending to the house, consorting
freely with the men, and receiving pay for their services.
A girl leading this life in the clubhouse of another village is well
treated by the men: a wrong done to her is a wrong done to the
whole club; and in her own village her value is increased, not
diminished, by the time she thus spends as a prostitute in a
neighbouring community. After her period of service is over
she may marry either in the village where she has served or in
her own. Sometimes many or all of the young women of a village
go together to act as prostitutes (<foreign rend='italic'>armengols</foreign>) in a neighbouring
village, and for this they are well paid by the community which
receives them. The money so earned is divided among the chiefs
of the village to which the damsels belong. Such a joint expedition
of the unmarried girls of a village is called a <foreign rend='italic'>blolobol</foreign>. But the young
women never act as <foreign rend='italic'>armengols</foreign> in any clubhouse of their own
village.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 51-53, 91-98.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The
custom
supports
by analogy
the derivation
of the
similar
Asiatic
custom
from a
similar
state of
society.</note>
Thus, while the Pelew custom of prostituting the unmarried
girls to all the men of their own village, but not of their own clan, is
a form of sexual communism practised within a local group, the
custom of prostituting them to men of other villages is a form of
sexual communism practised between members of different local
groups; it is a kind of group-marriage. These customs of the
Pelew Islanders therefore support by analogy the hypothesis that
among the ancient peoples of Western Asia also the systematic
prostitution of unmarried women may have been derived from an
earlier period of sexual communism.<note place='foot'>See above, vol. i. pp. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Somewhat
similar
custom
observed
in Yap,
one of the
Caroline
Islands.</note>
A somewhat similar custom prevails in Yap, one of the western
group of the Caroline Islands, situated to the north of the Pelew
group. In each of the men's clubhouses <q>are kept three or four
unmarried girls or <foreign rend='italic'>Mespil</foreign>, whose business it is to minister to the
pleasures of the men of the particular clan or brotherhood to which
the building belongs. As with the Kroomen on the Gold Coast,
each man, married or single, takes his turn by rotation in the rites
through which each girl must pass before she is deemed ripe for
marriage. The natives say it is an ordeal or preliminary trial to fit
them for the cares and burden of maternity. She is rarely a girl of
the same village, and, of course, must be sprung from a different
sept. Whenever she wishes to become a <foreign rend='italic'>Langin</foreign> or respectable
married woman, she may, and is thought none the less of for her
frailties as a <foreign rend='italic'>Mespil</foreign>.... But I believe this self-immolation before
marriage is confined to the daughters of the inferior chiefs and
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
commons. The supply of <foreign rend='italic'>Mespil</foreign> is generally kept up by the purchase
of slave girls from the neighbouring districts.</q><note place='foot'>F. W. Christian, <hi rend='italic'>The Caroline
Islands</hi> (London, 1899), pp. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Compare W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>The Island
of Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines</hi>
(Philadelphia and London, 1910), pp.
46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> According
to another account a <foreign rend='italic'>mespil</foreign> <q>must always be stolen, by force or
cunning, from a district at some distance from that wherein her
captors reside. After she has been fairly, or unfairly, captured and
installed in her new home, she loses no shade of respect among her
own people; on the contrary, have not her beauty and her worth
received the highest proof of her exalted perfection, in the devotion,
not of one, but of a whole community of lovers?</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> However,
though the girl is nominally stolen from another district, the matter
is almost always arranged privately with the local chief, who consents
to wink hard at the theft in consideration of a good round sum of
shell money and stone money, which serves <q>to salve the wounds of
a disrupted family and dispel all thoughts of a bloody retaliation.
Nevertheless, the whole proceeding is still carried out with the
greatest possible secrecy and stealth.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Furness, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 49
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Custom of slaying Chiefs.'/>
<head>§ 3. Custom of slaying Chiefs.</head>

<p>
<note place='margin'>In the
Pelew
Islands the
heir to the
chieftainship
of a
clan has
a formal
right to
slay his
predecessor.</note>
In the Pelew Islands when the chief of a clan has reigned too
long or has made himself unpopular, the heir has a formal right to
put him to death, though for reasons which will appear this right is
only exercised in some of the principal clans. The practice of regicide,
if that word may be extended to the assassination of chiefs, is
in these islands a national institution regulated by exact rules, and
every high chief must lay his account with it. Indeed so well
recognized is the custom that when the heir-apparent, who under the
system of mother-kin must be a brother, a nephew, or a cousin on
the mother's side, proves himself precocious and energetic, the people
say, <q>The cousin is a grown man. The chief's <foreign rend='italic'>tobolbel</foreign> is nigh at
hand.</q><note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi>, p. 43. The
writer does not translate the word
<foreign rend='italic'>tobolbel</foreign>, but the context sufficiently
explains its meaning.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The plot
of death
and its
execution.</note>
In such cases the plot of death is commonly so well hushed
up that it seldom miscarries. The first care of the conspirators
is to discover where the doomed man keeps his money. For
this purpose an old woman will sleep for some nights in the
house and make inquiries quietly, till like a sleuth-hound she has
nosed the hoard. Then the conspirators come, and the candidate
for the chieftainship despatches his predecessor either with his own
hand or by the hand of a young cousin. Having done the deed he
takes possession of the official residence, and applies to the widow
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
of the deceased the form of persuasion technically known as
<foreign rend='italic'>meleket</foreign>. This consists of putting a noose round her neck, and
drawing it tighter and tighter till she consents to give up her late
husband's money. After that the murderer and his friends have
nothing further to do for the present, but to remain quietly in the
house and allow events to take their usual course.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>Ceremonies
observed
before the
assassin is
recognized
as chief in
room of his
victim.</note>
Meantime the chiefs assemble in the council-house, and the
loud droning notes of the triton-shell, which answers the purpose
of a tocsin, summon the whole population to arms. The warriors
muster, and surrounding the house where the conspirators are
ensconced they shower spears and stones at it, as if to inflict condign
punishment on the assassins. But this is a mere blind, a sham, a
legal fiction, intended perhaps to throw dust in the eyes of the
ghost and make him think that his death is being avenged. In
point of fact the warriors take good care to direct their missiles
at the roof or walls of the house, for if they threw them at the
windows they might perhaps hurt the murderer. After this formality
has been satisfactorily performed, the regicide steps out of the house
and engages in the genial task of paying the death duties to the
various chiefs assembled. When he has observed this indispensable
ceremony, the law is satisfied: all constitutional forms have been
carried out: the assassin is now the legitimate successor of his
victim and reigns in his stead without any further trouble.
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>But the
formalities
which a
chief has
to observe
at his
accession
are much
more complicated
and tedious
if he has not
murdered
his predecessor.</note>
But if he has omitted to massacre his predecessor and has
allowed him to die a natural death, he suffers for his negligence
by being compelled to observe a long series of complicated and
irksome formalities before he can make good his succession in the
eyes of the law. For in that case the title of chief has to be formally
withdrawn from the dead man and conferred on his successor by a
curious ceremony, which includes the presentation of a coco-nut
and a taro plant to the new chief. Moreover, at first he may not
enter the chief's house, but has to be shut up in a tiny hut for thirty
or forty days during all the time of mourning, and even when that is
over he may not come out till he has received and paid for a human
head brought him by the people of a friendly state. After that he
still may not go to the sea-shore until more formalities have been fully
observed. These comprise a very costly fishing expedition, which is
conducted by the inhabitants of another district and lasts for weeks.
At the end of it a net full of fish is brought to the chief's house, and
the people of the neighbouring communities are summoned by the
blast of trumpets. As soon as the stranger fishermen have been
publicly paid for their services, a relative of the new chief steps
across the net and solemnly splits a coco-nut in two with an old-fashioned
knife made of a Tridacna shell, while at the same time he
bans all the evils that might befall his kinsman. Then, without
looking at the nut, he throws the pieces on the ground, and if they
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
fall so that the two halves lie with the opening upwards, it is an omen
that the chief will live long. The pieces of the nut are then tied
together and taken to the house of another chief, the friend of the
new ruler, and there they are kept in token that the ceremony has
been duly performed. Thereupon the fish are divided among the
people, the strangers receiving half. This completes the legal
ceremonies of accession, and the new chief may now go about
freely. But these tedious formalities and others which I pass over
are dispensed with when the new chief has proved his title by slaying
his predecessor. In that case the procedure is much simplified,
but on the other hand the death duties are so very heavy that
only rich men can afford to indulge in the luxury of regicide. Hence
in the Pelew Islands of to-day, or at least of yesterday, the old-fashioned
mode of succession by slaughter is now restricted to a few
families of the bluest blood and the longest purses.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer</hi>, pp. 43-45, 75-78.</note>
</p>

<p>
<note place='margin'>The Pelew
custom
shows how
regicide
may be
regarded as
an ordinary
incident of
constitutional
government.</note>
If this account of the existing or recent usage of the Pelew
Islanders sheds little light on the motives for putting chiefs to death,
it well illustrates the business-like precision with which such a
custom may be carried out, and the public indifference, if not
approval, with which it may be regarded as an ordinary incident of
constitutional government. So far, therefore, the Pelew custom
bears out the view that a systematic practice of regicide, however
strange and revolting it may seem to us, is perfectly compatible
with a state of society in which human conduct and human life
are estimated by a standard very different from ours. If we would
understand the early history of institutions, we must learn to detach
ourselves from the prepossessions of our own time and country,
and to place ourselves as far as possible at the standpoint of men
in distant lands and distant ages.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Aban, a Persian month, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abd-Hadad, priestly king of Hierapolis, i. 163 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aberdeenshire, All Souls' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abi-baal, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abi-el, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abi-jah, King, his family, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>father of Jehovah,</q> 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abi-melech, <q>father of a king,</q> i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abi-milk (Abi-melech), king of Tyre, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abimelech massacres his seventy brothers, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abipones, of South America, their worship of the Pleiades, i. 258 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham, his attempted sacrifice of Isaac, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abruzzi, gossips of St. John in the, i. 245 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marvellous properties attributed to water on St. John's Night in the, 246;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Easter ceremonies in the, 256;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the feast of All Souls in the, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules as to sowing seed and cutting timber in the, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abu Rabah, resort of childless wives in Palestine, i. 78, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abydos, head of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the favourite burial-place of the Egyptians, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>specially associated with Osiris, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tombs of the ancient Egyptian kings at, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ritual of, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hall of the Osirian mysteries at, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representations of the Sed festival at, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inscriptions at, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of Osiris at, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acacia, Osiris in the, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achaia, subject to earthquakes, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acharaca, cave of Pluto at, i. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acilisena, temple of Anaitis at, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adad, Syrian king, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Babylonian and Assyrian god of thunder and lightning, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adana in Cilicia, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Addison, Joseph, on the grotto <foreign rend='italic'>dei cani</foreign> at Naples, i. 205 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adhar, a Persian month, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adom-melech or Uri-melech, king of Byblus, i. 14, 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Adon</foreign>, a Semitic title, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 20, 49 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonai, title of Jehovah, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoni, <q>my lord,</q> Semitic title, i. 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>names compounded with, 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoni-bezek, king of Jerusalem, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoni-jah, elder brother of King Solomon, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adoni-zedek, king of Jerusalem, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonis, myth of, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Greek worship of, 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Greek mythology, 10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Syria, 13 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monuments of, 29;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Cyprus, 31 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Osiris, 32;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourning for, at Byblus, 38;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to be the fruit of incest, 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mother Myrrha, 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>son of Theias, 43 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, 55 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the son of Cinyras, 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the title of the sons of Phoenician kings in Cyprus, 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his violent death, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>music in the worship of, 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred prostitution in the worship of, 57;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inspired prophets in worship of, 76;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human representatives of, perhaps burnt, 110;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doves burned in honour of, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personated by priestly kings, 223;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ritual of, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death and resurrection represented in his rites, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festivals of, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>flutes played in the laments for, 225 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ascension of, 225;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>images of, thrown into the sea or springs, 225, 227 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 236;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>born from a myrrh-tree, 227, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bewailed by Argive women, i. 227 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>analogy of his rites to Indian and European ceremonies, 227;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death and resurrection interpreted as representations of the decay and revival of vegetation, 227 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted as the sun, 228;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted by the ancients as the god of the reaped and sprouting corn, 229;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a corn-spirit, 230 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hunger the root of the worship of, 231;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
originally a personification of wild vegetation, especially grass and trees, 233;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the gardens of, 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rain-charm in the rites of, 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resemblance of his rites to the festival of Easter, 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 306;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Bethlehem, 257 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the planet Venus as the Morning Star, 258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes identified with Attis, 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>swine not eaten by worshippers of, 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, among the Greeks, 298;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lamented by women at Byblus, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adonis and Aphrodite, i. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 29, 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their marriage celebrated at Alexandria, 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Attis identified with Dionysus, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Osiris, similarity between their rites, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Attis, Osiris, their mythical similarity, i. 6, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the river, its valley, i. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual discoloration of the, 30, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aedepsus, hot springs of Hercules at, i. 211 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aedesius, Sextilius Agesilaus, dedicates altar to Attis, i. 275 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aegipan and Hermes, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aelian, on impregnation of Judean maid by serpent, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeneas and Dido, i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeschylus, on Typhon, i. 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aesculapius, in relation to serpents, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reputed father of Aratus, 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his shrines at Sicyon and Titane, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dispute with Hercules, 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aeson and Medea, i. 181 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Aetna</hi>, Latin poem, i. 221 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, serpents as reincarnations of the dead in, i. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>infant burial in, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reincarnation of the dead in, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual festivals of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of dead kings and chiefs in, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supreme gods in, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of ancestral spirits among the Bantu tribes of, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inheritance of the kingship under mother-kin in, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, North, custom of bathing at Midsummer among the Mohammedan peoples of, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, West, sacred men and women in, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices in, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Afterbirth'/>
<l>Afterbirth or placenta regarded as a person's double or twin, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>See <hi rend='italic'>also</hi> <ref target='Index-Placenta'>Placenta</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Afterbirths buried in banana groves, i. 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as twins of the children, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Shilluk kings interred where their afterbirths are buried, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agbasia, West African god, i. 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agdestis, a man-monster in the myth of Attis, i. 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agesipolis, King of Sparta, his conduct in an earthquake, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agraulus, daughter of Cecrops, worshipped at Salamis in Cyprus, i. 145, 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agricultural peoples worship the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agriculture, religious objections to, i. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the hands of women in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its tendency to produce a conservative character, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ahts of Vancouver Island regard the moon as the husband of the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Airi, a deity of North-West India, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aiyar, N. Subramhanya, on Indian dancing-girls, i. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ajax and Teucer, names of priestly kings of Olba, i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akhetaton (Tell-el-Amarna), the capital of Amenophis IV., ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Akikuyu of British East Africa, their worship of snakes, i. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, 82, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alaska, the Esquimaux of, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Koniags of, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albania, marriage custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albanians of the Caucasus, their worship of the moon, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albinoes the offspring of the moon, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albiruni, Arab geographer, on the Persian festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alcman on dew, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aleutians, effeminate sorcerers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander Severus, at festival of Attis, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander the Great expels a king of Paphos, i. 42;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his fabulous birth, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assumes costumes of deities, 165;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to Megarsian Athena, 169 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, festival of Adonis at, i. 224;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Serapeum at, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandrian calendar, used by Plutarch, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; year, the fixed, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plutarch's use of the, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Saints, feast of, perhaps substituted for an old pagan festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>All Souls, feast of, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>originally a pagan festival of the dead, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted by Odilo, abbot of Clugny, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Allatu, Babylonian goddess, i. 9</l>
</lg>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<lg>
<l>Allifae in Samnium, baths of Hercules at, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almo, procession to the river, in the rites of Attis, i. 273.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almond causes virgin to conceive, i. 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the father of all things, 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alyattes, king of Lydia, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alynomus, king of Paphos, i. 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amambwe, a Bantu tribe of Northern Rhodesia, its head chief reincarnated in a lion, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amasis, king of Egypt, his body burnt by Cambyses, i. 176 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amathus, in Cyprus, Adonis and Melcarth at, i. 32, 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>statue of lion-slaying god found at, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amatongo, ancestral spirits (Zulu term), i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambabai, an Indian goddess, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambala District, Punjaub, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amélineau, E., discovers the tomb of King Khent, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amenophis IV., king of Egypt, his attempt to abolish all gods but the sun-god, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>America, reincarnation of the dead in, i. 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the moon worshipped by the agricultural Indians of tropical, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amestris, wife of Xerxes, her sacrifice of children, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon, Milcom, the god of, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon (the Egyptian) at Thebes, his human wives, i. 72;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Thebes identified with the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rage of King Amenophis IV. against the god, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amoor, Gilyaks of the, i. 278 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amorites, their law as to fornication, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amsanctus, the valley of, i. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amulets, crowns and wreaths as, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amyclae, in the vale of Sparta, i. 313, 314, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amyclas, father of Hyacinth, i. 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anacreon, on Cinyras, i. 55</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anacyndaraxes, father of Sardanapalus, i. 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anaitis, sacred prostitution in the worship of, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Anassa</foreign>, <q>Queen,</q> title of goddess, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anazarba or Anazarbus, in Cilicia, i. 167 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestor-worship among the Khasis of Assam, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>combined with mother-kin tends to a predominance of goddesses over gods in religion, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ancestors, propitiation of deceased, i. 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the worship of, the main practical religion of the Bantu tribes, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ancestral-Spirits'/>
<l>Ancestral spirits on shoulders of medicine-men, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incarnate in serpents, 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the form of animals, 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the Bantu tribes of Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayers to, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>s.q.</hi>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the father's and on the mother's side, the two distinguished, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Dead'>Dead</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anchiale in Cilicia, i. 144; monument of Sardanapalus at, 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andania in Messenia, sacred men and women at, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Andriamasinavalona, a Hova king, vicarious sacrifice for, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anemone, the scarlet, sprung from the blood of Adonis, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angel, the Destroying, over Jerusalem, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angus, belief as to the weaning of children in, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anhalt, custom at sowing in, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animals sacrificed by being hanged, i. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 292;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and plants, edible, savage lamentations for, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dead kings and chiefs incarnate in, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to prolong the life of kings, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anje-a, a mythical being who brings children to women, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anklets made of human sinews worn by king of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ankole, in Central Africa, the Bahima of, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anna, sister of Dido, i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annam, offerings to the dead in spring in, i. 235 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual festivals of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Annual death and resurrection of gods, i. 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anointing as a ceremony of consecration, i. 21 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2 and  3, 68, 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacred stones, custom of, i. 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antelopes, soul of a dead king incarnate in, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Anthesteria</foreign>, festival of the dead at Athens, i. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antigonus, King, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antimachia in Cos, priest of Hercules at, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antioch, destroyed by an earthquake, i. 222 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Adonis at, 227, 257 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antiochus, Greek calendar of, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antwerp, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anubis, Egyptian jackal-headed god, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>finds the body of Osiris, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apameia, worship of Poseidon at, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aphaca in Syria, sanctuary of Astarte at, i. 28, 259;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meteor as signal for festival at, 259</l>
</lg>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<lg>
<l>Aphrodite, her sacred doves, i. 33, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctuary of, at Paphos, 33 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the month of, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her blood dyes white roses red, 226;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name applied to summer, ii. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Adonis, i. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 29, 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their marriage celebrated at Alexandria, 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Cinyras, i. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Pygmalion, i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Lebanon, the mourning, i. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apinagos Indians of Brazil, their dances and presentation of children to the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apis, sacred Egyptian bull, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourning for the death of, i. 225;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>held to be an image of the soul of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollo, the friend of Cinyras, i. 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>music in the worship of, 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reputed father of Augustus, 81;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Catalonian, 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his musical contest with Marsyas, 288;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>purified at Tempe, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Artemis, their priesthood at Ephesus, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Marsyas, i. 55</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; at Delphi, sacrifices of Croesus to, i. 180 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the Dragon at Delphi, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Golden Sword, i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Four-handed, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apotheosis by being burnt alive, i. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Appian, on the costume of a priest of Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apples forbidden to worshippers of Cybele and Attis, i. 280 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apuleius, on the worship of Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arab name for the scarlet anemone, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabic writer on the mourning for Tá-uz (Tammuz) in Harran, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arabs resort to the springs of Callirrhoe in Moab, i. 215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Moab, their custom at harvest, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their remedies for ailments, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aratus of Sicyon, deemed a son of Aesculapius, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Araucanian Indians of South America eat fruit of Araucanian pine, i. 278 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Araunah, the threshing-floor of, i. 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arcadians sacrifice to thunder and lightning, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archigallus, high-priest of Attis, i. 268, 279;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophesies, 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arctic origin, alleged, of the Aryans, i. 229 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arenna or Arinna, i. 136 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sun-goddess of, 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arensdorf, custom at sowing in, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argaeus, Mount, in Cappadocia, i. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argive brides wore false beards, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women bewail Adonis, i. 227 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristomenes, Messenian hero, his fabulous birth, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristophanes, on the Spartan envoy, i. 196 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hercules as patron of hot springs, 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotelian philosophy, revival of the, i. 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle on the political institutions of Cyprus, i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on earthquakes, 211 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Armengols</hi>, in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenia, sacred prostitution of girls before marriage in, i. 38, 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armenians, their festivals of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their opinion of the baleful influence of the moon on children, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arrian on Attis, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemis at Perga, i. 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name given by Greeks to Asiatic Mother Goddesses, 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Apollo, their priesthood at Ephesus, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Ephesus served by eunuch priests, i. 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Hanged, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Laphrian, at Patrae, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Perasian, at Castabala, i. 115, 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Sarpedonian, in Cilicia, i. 167, 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Tauropolis, i. 275 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Tauric, human sacrifices to the, i. 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Artemision, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arunta of Central Australia, their belief in the reincarnation of the dead, i. 99, 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Arval-Brethren'/>
<l>Arval Brethren, their wreaths of corn, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Roman college of priests, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryan family, marriage customs of the, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryans, their alleged Arctic origin, i. 229 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual festivals of the dead among the, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aryenis, daughter of Alyattes, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascalon, the goddess Derceto at, i. 34 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ascension of Adonis, i. 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashantee, human sacrifices at earthquakes in, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings of, their human sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Asherim</foreign>, sacred poles, i. 18, 18 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 107, 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashes of human victims scattered by winnowing-fans, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashtoreth (Astarte), i. 18 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2 <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Astarte'>Astarte</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, i. 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>confused with the legendary Sardanapalus,
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carries off the bones of the kings of Elam, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ashvin, an Indian month, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia Minor, priestly dynasties of, i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subject to volcanic forces, 190;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subject to earthquakes, 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asiatic goddesses of fertility served by eunuch priests, i. 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asopus, the river, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>A-souling,</q> custom of, in England, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aspalis, a form of Artemis, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assam, the Khasis of, i. 46, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tangkul Nagas of, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assumption of the Virgin and the festival of Diana, i. 308, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrian cavalry, i. 25 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Assyrians in Cilicia, i. 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Astarte'/>
<l>Astarte at Byblus, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the <foreign rend='italic'>asherim</foreign>, 18;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings as priests of, 26;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Paphos, 33 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>doves sacred to, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the planet Venus, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Syrian Hierapolis served by eunuch priests, 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called by Lucian the Assyrian Hera, 280 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Heavenly Goddess, 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the planet Venus her star, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Aphrodite, i. 304 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asteria, mother of the Tyrian Hercules (Melcarth), i. 112</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astyages, king of the Medes, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Asvattha</foreign> tree, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atargatis, Syrian goddess, i. 34 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Hierapolis-Bambyce, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>derivation of the name, 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her husband-god, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ates, a Phrygian, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athamas, the dynasty of, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athanasius, on the mourning for Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>'Atheh, Cilician goddess, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athena, temple of, at Salamis in Cyprus, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and hot springs, 209, 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Magarsian, a Cilician goddess, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sciras, sanctuary of, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenian boys, race of, at the vintage, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boy carrying an olive-branch in procession, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athenians, their superstition as to an eclipse of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athens, sacred serpent at, i. 87;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Commemoration of the Dead at, 234;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of an ox at, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athribis, heart of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Athyr, Egyptian month, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris murdered on the seventeenth day of, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Osiris in the month of, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atonga, tribe of Lake Nyassa, their theory of earthquakes, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attica, summer festival of Adonis in, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Attis, priests of Cybele called, i. 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes identified with Adonis, 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>myth and ritual of, 263 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>beloved by Cybele, 263, 282;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legends of his death, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his legend at Pessinus, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his self-mutilation, 264 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the pine-tree, 264, 265, 267, 271, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 285, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eunuch priests, i. 265, 266;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of his death and resurrection in March, 267 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>violets sprung from the blood of, 267;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the mourning for, 272;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bath of bull's blood in the rites of, 274 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mysteries of, 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a god of vegetation, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 279;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as the Father God, 281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Zeus, 282;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a sky-god, 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emasculation of, suggested explanation of myth, 283;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his star-spangled cap, 284;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Phrygian moon-god Men Tyrannus, 284;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human representatives of, 285 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>title borne by priests of Cybele, 285, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Adonis, Osiris, their mythical similarity, i. 6, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atys, son of Croesus, his death, i. 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>early king of Lydia, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aubrey, John, on soul-cakes, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine on the effeminate priests of the Great Mother, i. 298;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the heathen origin of Christmas, 305;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the discovery of corn by Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Salacia as the wife of Neptune, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustodunum (Autun), worship of Cybele at, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustus reputed a son of Apollo, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aulus Gellius on the influence of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Aun'/>
<l>Aun, or On, King of Sweden, sacrifices his sons to Odin, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aunis, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurelia Aemilia, a sacred harlot, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurohuacas, Indians of Colombia, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aust, E., on the marriage of the Roman gods, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australia, belief as to the reincarnation of the dead in, i. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Australian aborigines, their preparation for marriage, i. 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in conception without sexual intercourse, 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their cuttings for the dead, 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austria, leaping over Midsummer fires in, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Awakening of Hercules,</q> festival at Tyre, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>

<lg>
<l>Awemba, Bantu tribe of Rhodesia, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of ancestral spirits, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their prayers to dead kings before going to war, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Axe, emblem of Hittite god of thundering sky, i. 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as divine emblem, 163;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>symbol of Asiatic thunder-god, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, double-headed, symbol of Sandan, i. 127;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried by Lydian kings, 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a palladium of the Heraclid sovereignty, 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>figured on coins, 183 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ba-bwende, a tribe of the Congo, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ba-sundi, a tribe of the Congo, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baal, Semitic god, i. 15, 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>royal names compounded with, 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as the god of fertility, 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>conceived as god who fertilizes land by subterranean water, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Sandan at Tarsus, i. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Lebanon, i. 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Tarsus, i. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baalath or Astarte, i. 26, 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Baal, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Gebal, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baalbec, i. 28;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred prostitution at, 37;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>image of Hadad at, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baalim, firstlings and first-fruits offered to the, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called lovers, 75 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylon, early kings of, worshipped as gods, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of Mylitta at, 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious prostitution at, 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human wives of Marduk at, 71;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctuary of Serapis at, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonia, worship of Tammuz in, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the moon-god took precedence of the sun-god in ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Babylonian hymns to Tammuz, i. 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacchanals tear Pentheus in pieces, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacchic orgies suppressed by Roman government, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacchylides as to Croesus on the pyre, i. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Backbone of Osiris represented by the <foreign rend='italic'>ded</foreign> pillar, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baden, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baethgen, F., on goddess 'Hatheh, i. 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Baganda'/>
<l>Baganda, their worship of the python, i. 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rebirth of the dead among the, 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their theory of earthquakes, 199;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their presentation of infants to the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremony observed by the king at new moon, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of dead kings, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their veneration for the ghosts of dead relations, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their pantheon, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices offered to prolong the life of their kings, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagishu (Bageshu) of Mount Elgon, reincarnation of the dead among the, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bagobos of the Philippine Islands, their theory of earthquakes, i. 200;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Mindanao, their custom of hanging and spearing human victims, 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baharutsis, a Bantu tribe of South Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bahima, their belief as to dead kings and chiefs, i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Ankole in Central Africa, their worship of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in a supreme god Lugaba, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Kiziba, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baigas, Dravidian tribe of India, their objection to agriculture, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bailly, French astronomer, on the Arctic origin of the rites of Adonis, i. 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bairu, the, of Kiziba, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baku, on the Caspian, perpetual fires at, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balinese, their conduct in an earthquake, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Baloi</hi>, witches and wizards, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banana, women impregnated by the flower of the, i. 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bangalas of the Congo, rebirth of dead among the, i. 92. <hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Boloki</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bantu tribes, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of ancestral spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their main practical religion a worship of ancestors, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of the dead, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Banyoro, their worship of serpents, i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism of bull's blood in the rites of Cybele, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bar-rekub, king of Samal, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baralongs, a Bantu tribe of South Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barea and Kunama, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barley forced for festival, i. 240, 241, 242, 244, 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and wheat discovered by Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barotse, a Bantu tribe of the Zambesi, their belief in a supreme god Niambe, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of dead kings, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barren women resort to graves in order to get children, i. 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>entice souls of dead children to them, 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Barrenness'/>
<l>Barrenness of women cured by passing through holed stone, i. 36, with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removed by serpent, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children murdered as a remedy for, 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barrows of Halfdan, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<lg>
<l>Barsom, bundle of twigs used by Parsee priests, i. 191 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barth, H., on sculptures at BoghazKeui, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basil, pots of, on St. John's Day in Sicily, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basuto chiefs buried secretly, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basutos, worship of the dead among the, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bataks of Sumatra, their theory of earthquakes, i. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Batara-guru, the Batak creator, i. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bath in river at the rites of Cybele, i. 273, 274 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bull's blood in the rites of Attis, 274 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of image of Cybele perhaps a rain-charm, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Aphrodite, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Demeter, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Hera in the river Burrha, i. 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the spring of Canathus, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bathing on St. John's Day or Eve (Midsummer Day or Eve), i. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pagan origin of the custom, 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baths of Hercules, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Solomon in Moab, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Batoo Bedano, an earthquake god, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Battle, purificatory ceremonies after a, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the gods and giants, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baudissin, W. W. Graf von, on Tammuz and Adonis, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Adonis as the personification of the spring vegetation, 228 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on summer festival of Adonis, 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bavaria, gardens of Adonis in, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bawenda, the, of South Africa, the positions of their villages hidden, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bearded Venus, in Cyprus, i. 165, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beaufort, F., on perpetual flame in Lycia, i. 222 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bechuana ritual at founding a new town, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bechuanas, their sacrifice of a blind bull on various occasions, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bede, on the feast of All Saints, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beech, M. W. H., on serpent-worship, i. 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Beena</foreign> marriage in Ceylon, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Begbie, General, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bel or Marduk at Babylon, i. 71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Belgium, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellerophon and Pegasus, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bellona and Mars, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ben-hadad, king of Damascus, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bendall, Professor C., i. 229 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benefit of clergy, i. 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bengal, the Oraons and Mundas of, i. 46, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benin, human victims crucified at, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bent, J. Theodore, discovers ruins of Olba, i. 151;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identifies site of Hieropolis-Castabala, 168 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berecynthia, title of Cybele, i. 279 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Berenice and Ptolemy, annual festival in their honour, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bes, Egyptian god, i. 118 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bethlehem, worship of Adonis at, i. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertility of the neighbourhood, 257 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Star of, 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Betsileo of Madagascar, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bghais, a Karen tribe of Burma, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhâdon, Indian month, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bharbhunjas, of the Central Provinces, India, marriage custom of the, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bharias, of the Central Provinces, India, exchange of costume between men and women at marriage among the, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bhujariya, festival in the Central Provinces of India, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bilaspore, infant burial in, i. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual festival of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bion on the scarlet anemone, i. 226 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bird, soul of a tree in a, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; called <q>the soul of Osiris,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birds burnt in honour of Artemis, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white, souls of dead kings incarnate in, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birks, Rev. E. B., on harvest custom at Orwell, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birth, new, through blood in rites of Attis, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Egyptian kings at the Sed festival, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Birthday of the Sun, the twenty-fifth of December, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bisa chiefs reincarnated in pythons, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bishnois of the Punjaub, infant burial among the, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bithynians invoke Attis, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Black-snake clan, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Blay</foreign>, men's clubhouse in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blekinge, province of Sweden, Midsummer custom in, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blind bull sacrificed at the foundation of a town, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed before an army going to war, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blood, bath of bull's, in the rites of Attis, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>remission of sins through the shedding of, 299;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used in expiation for homicide, 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of pig used in exorcism and purification, 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not to be shed in certain sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<lg>
<l>Blood, the Day of, in the festival of Attis, i. 268, 285</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blowing of Trumpets in the festival of Attis, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blue Spring, the, at Syracuse, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boar, Attis killed by a, i. 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bocage of Normandy, rule as to the clipping of wool in the, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodies of the dead, magical uses made of the, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>guarded against mutilation, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be endowed with magical powers, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bodroum in Cilicia, ruins of, i. 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boghaz-Keui, Hittite capital, excavations of H. Winckler at, i. 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>situation and remains, 128 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the gods of, 128 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rock-hewn sculptures at, 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bohemia, May-pole or Midsummer-tree in, i. 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolivia, the Chiriguanos Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boloki, or Bangala, of the Upper Congo, their ceremonies at the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>attempt to deceive spirit of disease among the, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bones of the dead used in rain-making ceremonies, i. 22;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead kings carried off or destroyed by enemies, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, fossil, source of myths about giants, i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonfire on St. John's Eve, dances round it, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Book of the Dead</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bor, the ancient Tyana, Hittite monument at, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Borneo, custom of head-hunting in, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effeminate sorcerers in, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosanquet, Professor R. C., on the Four-handed Apollo, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bosman, W., on serpent-worship, i. 67</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bouche, Abbé, on West African priestesses, i. 66 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boys of living parents in ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as girls to avert the Evil Eye, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage customs to ensure the birth of, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brahman marriage in Southern India, bride dressed as a boy at, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazil, the Apinagos Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brazilian Indians, their belief in the noxious influence of the moon on children, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bread, fast from, in mourning for Attis, i. 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breasted, Professor J. H., on the eye of Horus, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Amenophis IV., <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Sed festival, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Breath not to defile sacred flame, i. 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brethren of the Ploughed Fields (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fratres Arvales</foreign>), a Roman college of priests, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Arval-Brethren'>Arval Brethren</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Bride</q> of the Nile, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Bridegroom at Midsummer in Sweden, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridegroom disfigured in order to avert the evil eye, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>British Columbia, the Indians of, respect the animals and plants which they eat, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brittany, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>belief as to warts and the moon in, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bromo, volcano in Java, worshipped, i. 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brother of a god, i. 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dead elder, worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brothers and sisters, marriages of, in royal families, i. 44;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their intention to keep the property in the family, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, A. R., on the beliefs of the West Australian aborigines as to the causes of childbirth, i. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, Dr. George, on snakes as reincarnations of chiefs, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bruges, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brugsch, H., on Egyptian names for a year, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Sothic period, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the grave of Osiris at Philae, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Isis as a personified corn-field, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddha and Buddhism, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buddhism, spiritual declension of, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Budge, Dr. E. A. Wallis, on goddess Net, i. 282 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on an Egyptian funeral rite, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Isis, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the nature of Osiris, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the solar theory of Osiris, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the historical reality of Osiris, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Khenti-Amenti, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buduna tribe of West Australia, their beliefs as to the birth of children, i. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bugis of South Celebes, effeminate priests or sorcerers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgaria, marriage customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull as emblem of generative force, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the Hittites, 123, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emblem of Hittite thunder-god, 134 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hittite god standing on a, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as emblem of a thunder-god, 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as symbol of thunder and fertility, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the emblem of the Father God, 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Euyuk, 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>testicles of, used in rites of Cybele and Attis, 276;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed at Egyptian funeral, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>white,
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
soul of dead king incarnate in a, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to prolong the life of a king, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to Zeus, the Saviour of the City, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>blinded and sacrificed at the foundation of a town, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull's blood, bath of, in the rites of Attis, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; hide cut in strips and pegged down round the site of a new town, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bride seated on a, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; skin, body of the dead placed in a, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulls, husband-god at Hierapolis seated on, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrificed at caves of Pluto, i. 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to Persephone, 213 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to dead chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burial at cross-roads, i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of infants to ensure their rebirth, i. 91, 93 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Gezer, 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Osiris in his rites, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burma, the Bghais of, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burmese, their conduct during an earthquake, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burne, Miss C. S., and Miss G. F. Jackson on <q>Souling Day</q> in Shropshire, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burning of Melcarth, i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Sandan, 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Cilician gods, 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Sardanapalus, 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Croesus, 174 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a god, 188 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnings for dead kings of Judah, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for dead Jewish Rabbis at Meiron, 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burns, Robert, on John Barleycorn, i. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burnt alive, apotheosis by being, i. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Land of Lydia, i. 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Burrha, river, Hera's bath in the, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buru, East Indian island, use of oil as a charm in, i. 21 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Busiris, backbone of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>specially associated with Osiris, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ritual of, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of Osiris at, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Osiris in the month of Khoiak at, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of Usirniri at, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Busiro, the district containing the graves and temples of the kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bustard totem, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buto, city in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butterflies, soul of a dead king incarnate in, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byblus, Adonis at, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the kings of, 14 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourning for Adonis at, 38;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious prostitution at, 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inspired prophets at, 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Adonis at, 225;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris and Isis at, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the queen of, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris associated with, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its relation to Egypt, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byrsa, origin of the name, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cadmus turned into a snake, i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps personated by the Laurel-bearer at Thebes, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Mount, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cadys, a Lydian, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caeculus, son of the fire-god Vulcan, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caesar introduces the Julian calendar, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to German observation of the moon, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caffre purificatory ceremonies after a battle, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cairo, ceremony of cutting the dams at, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabar district, heads of chiefs buried secretly in the, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calabria, Easter custom in, i. 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calauria, Poseidon worshipped in, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendar, the natural, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Alexandrian, used by Plutarch, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Coptic, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Egyptian, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of its introduction, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Egyptian farmer, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Esne, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Indians of Yucatan, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Julian, ii. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the ancient Mexicans, its mode of intercalation, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Philocalus, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 304 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calendars, the Roman Rustic, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>California, the Karok Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Indians of, their annual festivals of the dead, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Californian Indians eat pine nuts, i. 278 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their notion that the owl is the guardian of the <q>California big tree,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callaway, Rev. Henry, on the worship of the dead among the Zulus, ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Callirrhoe, the springs of, in Moab, i. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calpurnius Piso, L., on the wife of Vulcan, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calycadnus River, in Cilicia, i. 167 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camasene and Janus, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambodia, annual festival of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambridge, personal relics of Kibuka, the war-god of the Baganda, preserved at, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cambyses, king of Persia, his treatment of Amasis, i. 176 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cameroon negroes, expiation for homicide among the, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>

<lg>
<l>Camul, custom as to hospitality in, i. 39 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canaanite kings of Jerusalem, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canathus, Hera's annual bath in the spring of, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Candaules, king of Lydia, i. 182, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canicular year, a Sothic period, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canopic decree, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Canopus, the decree of, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capaneus and Evadne, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cape Bedford in Queensland, belief of the natives as to the birth of children, i. 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capital punishment among some peoples originally a sacrifice, i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capitol at Rome, ceremonies at the rebuilding of the, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cappadocia, volcanic region of, i. 189 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fire-worship in, 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Car Nicobar, exorcism in, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carchemish, Hittite capital on Euphrates, i. 123, 137 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carchi, a province of Ecuador, All Souls' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caria, Zeus Labrandeus in, i. 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>poisonous vapours in, 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carians, their mourning for Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caribs worshipped the moon in preference to the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlyle, Thomas, on the execution of the astronomer Bailly, i. 229 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carna and Janus, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnae, temples at, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sculptures at, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carnival at Rome in the rites of Attis, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; custom in Thracian villages, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpini, de Plano, on funeral customs of the Mongols, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carthage, legend and worship of Dido at, i. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hamilcar worshipped at, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the <foreign rend='italic'>suffetes</foreign> of, 116 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of Cybele at, 274 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the effeminate priests of the Great Mother at, 298;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legend as to the foundation of, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Casalis, E., on serpent-worship, i. 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the worship of the dead among the Basutos, ii. <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castabala in Cappadocia, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in Cilicia, worship of Perasian Artemis at, i. 115, 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castelnau, F. de, on the reverence of the Apinagos for the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castiglione a Casauria, in the Abruzzi, Midsummer custom at, i. 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castor's tune, i. 196 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castration of Cronus and Uranus, i. 283;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sky-god, suggested explanation of, 283;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of priests, suggested explanation of, 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catafalque burnt at funeral of king of Siam, i. 179</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catania in Sicily, the vineyards of, i. 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of Adonis at, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic Church, the ritual of the, i. 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ceremonies on Good Friday in the, 254, 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cato, i. 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catullus on self-mutilation of a priest of Attis, i. 270</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caucasus, the Albanians of the, i. 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Chewsurs of the, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cauldron, the magical, which makes the old young again, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caverns of Demeter, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caves, limestone, i. 152;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Semitic religion, 169 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cecrops, father of Agraulus, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cedar forests of Cilicia, i. 149, 150 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sprung from the body of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree god, Osiris interpreted as a, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celaenae, skin of Marsyas shown at, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celebes, conduct of the inhabitants in an earthquake, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Central, the Toradjas of, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Southern, marriage custom in, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celenderis in Cilicia, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celtic year reckoned from November 1st, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Censorinus, on the date of the rising of Sirius, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Central Provinces of India, gardens of Adonis in the, i. 242 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceos, the rising of Sirius observed in, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rule as to the pollution of death in, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cereals cultivated in ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceremonies, magical, for the regulation of the seasons, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceres married to Orcus, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ceylon, <foreign rend='italic'>beena</foreign> marriage in, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chadwick, Professor H. M., ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the dismemberment of Halfdan the Black, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on a priest dressed as a woman, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Change in date of Egyptian festivals with the adoption of the fixed Alexandrian year, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chants, plaintive, of corn-reapers in antiquity, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charlemagne compared to Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charm, to protect a town, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charon, places of, i. 204, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Charonia</foreign>, places of Charon, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chastity, ceremonial, i. 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordeal of, 115 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<lg>
<l>Chent-Ament (Khenti-Amenti), title of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chephren, King of Egypt, his statue, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cherokee Indians, their myth of the Old Woman of the corn, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their lamentations after <q>the first working of the corn,</q> <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheshire, All Souls' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chewsurs of the Caucasus, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cheyne, T. K., on lament for kings of Judah, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chief, ancestral, reincarnate in snakes, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiefs in the Pelew Islands, custom of slaying, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, dead, worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to control the rain, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of, prophesy through living men and women, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Child-stones,</q> where souls of dead await rebirth, i. 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Childbirth, primitive ignorance of the causes of, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Childless'/>
<l>Childless women expect offspring from St. George, i. 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resort to Baths of Solomon, 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>receive offspring from serpent, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resort to graves in order to secure offspring, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resort to hot springs in Syria, 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children bestowed by saints, i. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>given by serpent, 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murdered that their souls may be reborn in barren women, 95;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed to volcano in Siao, 219;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed at irrigation channels, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificed by the Mexicans for the maize, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presented to the moon, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of God, i. 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of living parents in ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apparently thought to be endowed with more vitality than others, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chili, earthquakes in, i. 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chimaera, Mount, in Lycia, perpetual fire on, i. 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>China, funeral of emperor of, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chinese author on disturbance of earth-spirits by agriculture, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; character compared to that of the ancient Egyptians, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chios, men sacrificed to Dionysus in, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiriguanos Indians of Bolivia, their address to the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chiriqui, volcano, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chittim (Citium) in Cyprus, i. 31</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chnum of Elephantine identified with the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Choctaws, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ crucified on March 25th, tradition, i. 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian, F. W., on the prostitution of unmarried girls in Yap, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian festivals displace heathen festivals, i. 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity and paganism, their resemblances explained as diabolical counterfeits, i. 302, 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christians and pagans, their controversy as to Easter, i. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christmas, festival of, borrowed from the Mithraic religion, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the heathen origin of, 305</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chu-en-aten, name assumed by King Amenophis IV., ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chukchees of North-Eastern Asia, effeminate sorcerers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cicero at Cybistra, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corresponds with Cilician king, 145 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cilicia, male deity of, assimilated to Zeus, i. 118 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings of, their affinity to Sandan, 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Assyrians in, 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Western or Rugged, described, i. 148 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fossils of, 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cilician deity assimilated to Zeus, i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 148, 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Gates, pass of the, i. 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; goddesses, i. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; gods, the burning of, i. 170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; pirates, i. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; priests, names of, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cincius Alimentus, L., on Maia as the wife of Vulcan, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cinyrads, dynasty of the, i. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cinyras, the father of Adonis, i. 13, 14, 49;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>king of Byblus, 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founds sanctuary of Astarte, 28;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to have instituted religious prostitution, 41, 50;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his daughters, 41, 50;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his riches, 42;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his incest, 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>wooed by Aphrodite, 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of the name, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the friend of Apollo, 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legends of his death, 55</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ciotat in Provence, bathing at Midsummer at, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcision, exchange of dress between men and women at, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Citium (Chittim), in Cyprus, i. 31, 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Civilization, ancient, undermined by Oriental religions and other causes, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudianus, Lucius Minius, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudius, the Emperor, and the rites of Attis, i. 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudius Gothicus, the Emperor, i. 266 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clavigero, on the Mexican calendar, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>

<lg>
<l>Cleomenes, King of Sparta, and serpents, i. 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleon of Magnesia at Gades, i. 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Climatic and geographical conditions, their effect on national character, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clymenus, king of Arcadia, his incest, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cnossus in Crete, prehistoric palace at, i. 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cochinchina, annual festival of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock as emblem of a priest of Attis, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Codrington, Dr. R. H., on mother-kin in Melanesia, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coimbatore, dancing-girls at, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coincidence between the Christian and the heathen festivals of the divine death and resurrection, i. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cologne, Petrarch at, on St. John's Eve, i. 247 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colombia, rule as to the felling of timber in, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comana, in Cappadocia, i. 136 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in Pontus, worship of goddess Ma at, i. 39;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>swine not allowed to enter, 265 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the two cities, i. 168 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commemoration of the Dead at Athens, i. 234</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commodus, conspiracy against, i. 273;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>addicted to the worship of Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communal rights over women, i. 40, 61 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compromise of Christianity with paganism, parallel with Buddhism, i. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Conception'/>
<l>Conception, supposed, without sexual intercourse, i. 91, 93 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in women supposed to be caused by food, 96, 102, 103, 104, 105.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Impregnation'>Impregnation</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conceptional animals and plants as causes of pregnancy in women, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concubines, human, of the god Ammon, i. 72</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conder, C. R., on <q>holy men</q> in Syria, i. 77 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on turning money at the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condylea in Arcadia, sacred grove of Artemis at, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cone, image of Astarte, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cones as emblems of a goddess, i. 34 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>votive, found in Babylonia, 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confession of the dead, the Egyptian, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confucianism, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congo, burial of infants on the, i. 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest dressed as a woman on the, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conibos Indians of the Ucayali River, their theory of earthquakes, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conical stone as divine emblem, i. 165, 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine destroys temple of Astarte, i. 28;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suppresses sacred prostitution, 37;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>removes standard cubit from the Serapeum, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consus and Ops, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Contest for the throne of Egypt, traditions of a, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cook, A. B., i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on name of priest of Corycian Zeus, 155 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the death of Romulus, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the festival of Laurel-bearing at Thebes, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on traces of mother-kin in the myth and ritual of Hercules, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coomassie, in Ashantee, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Copenhagen, bathing on St. John's Eve at, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coptic calendar, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corea, dance of eunuchs in, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coreans, their ceremony on the fifteenth day of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corn sprouting from the dead body of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>water thrown on the last corn cut, a rain-charm, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and grapes, symbols of the god of Tarsus, i. 119, 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the god of Ibreez, 121;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>figured with double-headed axe on Lydian coin, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and vine, emblems of the gods of Tarsus and Ibreez, i. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, Adonis as a, i. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Attis as a, 279;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourned at midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris as a, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -reaping in Egypt, Palestine, and Greece, date of the, i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -sieve, severed limbs of Osiris placed on a, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirit, Tammuz or Adonis as a, i. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>propitiation of the, perhaps fused with a worship of the dead, 233 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented as a dead old man, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented by human victims, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -stuffed effigies of Osiris buried with the dead as a symbol of resurrection, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -wreaths as first-fruits, i. 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by Arval Brethren, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coronation, human sacrifices to prolong a king's life at his, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corycian cave, priests of Zeus at the, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the god of the, 152 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>described, 153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>saffron at the, 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name perhaps derived from crocus, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corycus in Cilicia, ruins of, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cos, traces of mother-kin in, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sacred Marriage in, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bridegroom dressed as woman in, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosenza in Calabria, Easter custom at, i. 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cotys, king of Lydia, i. 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cow, image of, in the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Isis represented with the head of a, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be impregnated by moonshine, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; goddess Shenty, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cows sacred to Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation of the world thought to be annually repeated, i. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crescent-shaped chest in the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crests of the Cilician pirates, i. 149</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crete, sacred trees and pillars in, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crimea, the Taurians of the, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crocodile-shaped hero, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croesus, king of Lydia, captures Pteria, i. 128;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burning of, 174 sqq., 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his burnt offerings to Apollo at Delphi, 180 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedicates golden lion at Delphi, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his son Atys, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cronion, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cronus, identified with Phoenician El, i. 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>castrates his father Uranus and is castrated by his son Zeus, 283;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>name applied to winter, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crook and scourge or flail, the emblems of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, compare 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crooke, W., on sacred dancing-girls, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Mohammedan saints, 78 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on infant burial, 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the custom of the False Bride, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crops dependent on serpent-god, i. 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human victims sacrificed for the, 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cross-roads, burial at, i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crown-wearer, priest of Hercules at Tarsus, i. 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crowns as amulets, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laid aside in mourning, etc., <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Egypt, the White and the Red, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crucifixion of Christ, tradition as to the date of, i. 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of human victims at Benin, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gentile, at the spring equinox, 307 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Crux ansata</foreign>, the Egyptian symbol of life, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cubit, the standard, kept in the temple of Serapis, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cultivation of staple food in the hands of women (Pelew Islands), ii. <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumont, Professor Franz, on the <foreign rend='italic'>taurobolium</foreign>, i. 275 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Nativity of the Sun, 303 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as to the parallel between Easter and the rites of Attis, 310 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Customs of the Pelew Islanders, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuthar, father of Adonis, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cuttings for the dead, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyaxares, king of the Medes, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cybele, the image of, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her cymbals and tambourines, 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her lions and turreted crown, 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priests of, called Attis, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Mother of the Gods, 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her love for Attis, 263, 282;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her worship adopted by the Romans, 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of virility to image of, 268;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subterranean chambers of, 268;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>orgiastic rites of, 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a goddess of fertility, 279;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped in Gaul, 279;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fasts observed by the worshippers of, 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a friend of Marsyas, 288;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effeminate priests of, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cybistra in Cappadocia, i. 120, 122, 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cymbal, drinking out of a, i. 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cymbals in religious music, i. 52, 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and tambourines in worship of Cybele, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynopolis, the cemetery of, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cypriote syllabary, i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprus, Phoenicians in, i. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adonis in, 31 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred prostitution in, 36, 50, 59;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Melcarth worshipped in, 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices in, 145 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the bearded Venus in, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyril of Alexandria on the festival of Adonis at Alexandria, i. 224 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyrus and Croesus, i. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyzicus, worship of the Placianian Mother at, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacia, hot springs in, i. 213</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dacotas, their theory of the waning moon, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Dad</foreign> pillar. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Ded'><foreign rend='italic'>Ded</foreign> pillar</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dahomans, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dahomey, kings of, their human sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dairyman, sacred, of the Todas, his custom as to the pollution of death, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bound to live apart from his wife, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dalisandos in Isauria, inscriptions at, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damascus, Aramean kings of, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damasen, a giant, i. 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Damatrius, a Greek month, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dams in Egypt, the cutting of the, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dance of eunuchs in Corea, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Congo, 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of hermaphrodites in Pegu, 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, at the Sed festival, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of king before the ghosts of his ancestor, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<lg>
<l>Dances, religious, i. 61, 65, 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at festivals of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the new moon, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dancing-girls in India, harlots and wives of the gods, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dañh-gbi, python-god, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Darmesteter, James, on the Fravashis, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his theory as to the date of the <hi rend='italic'>Gathas</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Dâsî</foreign>, dancing-girl, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dastarkon in Cappadocia, i. 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dates forbidden to worshippers of Cybele and Attis, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daughter of a god, i. 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>David, King, in relation to the old kings of Jerusalem, i. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his conquest of Ammon, 19;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his taking of a census, 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a harper, 52, 53, 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Goliath, i. 19 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Saul, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davis, Mr. R. F., on harvest custom in Nottinghamshire, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Day of Blood in rites of Attis, i. 268, 285</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>De Plano Carpini, on the funeral customs of the Mongols, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dea Dia, a Roman goddess of fertility, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Dead'/>
<l>Dead, Festival of the, in Java, i. 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of the, perhaps fused with the propitiation of the corn-spirit, 233 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cuttings for the, 268;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris king and judge of the, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Egyptian, identified with Osiris, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual festivals of the, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the spirits of the, personated by living men, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>magical uses made of their bodies, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of the, among the Bantu tribes of Africa, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Ancestral-Spirits'>Ancestral spirits</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, reincarnation of the, i. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in America, 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa, 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings and chiefs worshipped in Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices offered to, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incarnate in animals, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consulted as oracles, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices to, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the Barotse, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men believed to beget children, i. 91, 264</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sea, i. 23</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death in the fire as an apotheosis, i. 179 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the pollution of, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and resurrection, annual, of gods, i. 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Adonis represented in his rites, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>coincidence between the pagan and the Christian festival of the divine, 308;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Osiris dramatically represented in his rites, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Osiris interpreted as the decay and growth of vegetation, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>December, the twenty-fifth of, reckoned the winter solstice, and the birthday of the Sun, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decline of the civic virtues under the influence of Oriental religions, i. 300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ded'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ded</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>tet</foreign> pillar, the backbone of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dedicated men and women in Africa, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dedication of girls to the service of a temple, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of children to gods, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dee, river, holed stone in the, i. 36 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Defoe, Daniel, on the Angel of the Plague, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delos, sacred embassy to, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphi, Apollo and the Dragon at, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Delphinium Ajacis</foreign>, i. 314 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Demeter, her sacred caverns, i. 88;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred vaults of, 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sorrowing for the descent of the Maiden, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the month of, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mysteries of, at Eleusis, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the well, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Isis, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and ears of corn, i. 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Poseidon, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the king's son at Eleusis, i. 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Denderah, inscriptions at, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the hall of Osiris at, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Derceto, goddess at Ascalon, i. 34 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dervishes revered in Syria, i. 77 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Asia Minor, 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deucalion at Hierapolis, i. 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomic redactor, i. 26 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deuteronomy, publication of, i. 18 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deutsch-Zepling in Transylvania, rule as to sowing in, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Dêvadâsî</foreign>, dancing-girl, i. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Dêvaratiâl</foreign>, dancing-girl, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dew, bathing in the, on Midsummer Eve or Day, i. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 248;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a daughter of Zeus and the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diabolical counterfeits, resemblances of paganism to Christianity explained as, i. 302, 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diana, a Mother Goddess, i. 45;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her sanctuary at Nemi, 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dianus and Diana, i. 27, 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dido flees from Tyre, i. 50;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her traditional death in the fire, 114;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Carthage, 114;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of the name, 114 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an Avatar of Astarte, 177;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how she procured the site of Carthage, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinant, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dinkard</hi>, a Pahlavi work, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dinkas, their belief in serpents as reincarnations
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
of the dead, i. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pour milk on graves, 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dio Chrysostom, on the people of Tarsus, i. 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on pyre at Tarsus, 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodorus Siculus, on worship of Poseidon in Peloponnese, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the burial of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the rise of the Nile, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the date of harvest in Egypt, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Osiris as a sun-god, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the predominance of women over men in ancient Egypt, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diomede, human sacrifices to, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysus in form of bull, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>with vine and ploughman on a coin, 166;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ancient interpretation of, 194, 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, resurrection, and ascension of, 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torn in pieces, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices to, in Chios, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his coarse symbolism, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Osiris, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>race of boys at vintage from his sanctuary, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>men dressed as women in the rites of, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the effeminate, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diospolis Parva (How), monument of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diphilus, king of Cyprus, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disc, winged, as divine emblem, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Discoloration, annual, of the river Adonis, i. 30, 225</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Discovery of the body of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disease of language the supposed source of myths, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disguises to avert the evil eye, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to deceive dangerous spirits, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dismemberment of Osiris, suggested explanations of the, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Halfdan the Black, king of Norway, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Segera, a magician of Kiwai, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of kings and magicians, and use of their severed limbs to fertilize the country, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the bodies of the dead to prevent their souls from becoming dangerous ghosts, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ditino</foreign>, deified dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divination at Midsummer, i. 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divining bones, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divinities of the volcano Kirauea, i. 217</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divinity of Semitic kings, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Lydian kings, 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dixmude, in Belgium, feast of All Souls at, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dobrizhoffer, M., on the respect of the Abipones for the Pleiades, i. 258 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doctrine of lunar sympathy, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Dôd</foreign>, <q>beloved,</q> i. 19 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog-star. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Sirius'>Sirius</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doliche in Commagene, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domaszewski, Professor A., on the rites of Attis at Rome, i. 266 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dorasques of Panama, their theory of earthquakes, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dos Santos, J., Portuguese historian, on the method adopted by a Caffre king to prolong his life, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Double, the afterbirth or placenta, regarded as a person's double, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -headed axe, symbol of Sandan, i. 127;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried by Lydian kings, 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a palladium of the Heraclid sovereignty, 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>figured on coins, 183 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -headed eagle, Hittite emblem, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doutté, Edmond, on sacred prostitution in Morocco, i. 39 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Doves burnt in honour of Adonis, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, sacred, of Aphrodite, i. 33;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or Astarte, 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dowries earned by prostitution, i. 38, 59</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dragon slain by Cadmus at Thebes, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Apollo, at Delphi, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drama, sacred, of the death and resurrection of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dramas, magical, for the regulation of the seasons, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dramatic representation of the resurrection of Osiris in his rites, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams, revelations given to sick people by Pluto and Persephone in, i. 205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of the dead appear to the living in, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as causes of attempted transformation of men into women, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drenching last corn cut with water as a rain-charm, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drinking out of a king's skull in order to be inspired by his spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drought, kings answerable for, i. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drum, eating out of a, i. 274</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Drums, human sacrifice for royal, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duchesne, Mgr. L., on the origin of Christmas, i. 305 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the date of the Crucifixion, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dyaks of Sarawak, their custom of head-hunting, i. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ea, Babylonian god, i. 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eagle to carry soul to heaven, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>double-headed, Hittite emblem, 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ears of corn, emblem of Demeter, i. 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earth as the Great Mother, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and sky, myth of their violent separation, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the goddess, mother of Typhon, i. 156</l>
</lg>

<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>

<lg>
<l>Earth-goddess annually married to Sun-god, i. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disturbed by the operations of husbandry, 88 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>married to Sky-god, 282, with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirits disturbed by agriculture, i. 89</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earthquake god, i. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earthquakes, attempts to stop, i. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>East, mother-kin and Mother Goddesses in the ancient, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter, gardens of Adonis at, in Sicily, i. 253 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resemblance of the festival of, to the rites of Adonis, 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 306;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the festival of, assimilated to the spring festival of Attis, 306 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>controversy between Christians and pagans as to the origin of, 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Eater of the Dead,</q> fabulous Egyptian monster, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eclipse of the moon, Athenian superstition as to an, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eden, the tree of life in, i. 186 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edom, the kings of, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their bones burned by the Moabites, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Edonians in Thrace, Lycurgus king of the, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eesa, a Somali tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effect of geographical and climatic conditions on national character, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effeminate sorcerers or priests, order of, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Effigies of Osiris, stuffed with corn, buried with the dead as a symbol of resurrection, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, wives of Ammon in, i. 72;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of the corn-reaping in, 231 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Nativity of the Sun at the winter solstice in, 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in early June, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mother-kin in ancient, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian astronomers acquainted with the true length of the solar year, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; calendar, the official, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of its introduction, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ceremony at the winter solstice, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; dead identified with Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; farmer, calendar of the, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festivals, their dates shifting, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>readjustment of, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; funeral rites a copy of those performed over Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; hope of immortality centred in Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings worshipped as gods, i. 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the most ancient, buried at Abydos, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their oath not to correct the vague Egyptian year by intercalation, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps formerly slain in the character of Osiris, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Osiris, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>renew their life by identifying themselves with the dead and risen Osiris, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>born again at the Sed festival, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps formerly put to death to prevent their bodily and mental decay, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptian language akin to the Semitic, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; months, table of, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; myth of the separation of earth and sky, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; people, the conservatism of their character, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared to the Chinese, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; reapers, their lamentations and invocations of Isis, i. 232, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; religion, the development of, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dominated by Osiris, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; standard resembling a placenta, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; year vague, not corrected by intercalation, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sacred, began with the rising of Sirius, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians sacrifice red-haired men, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ancient, question of their ethnical affinity, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ekoi of Southern Nigeria, their custom of mutilating men and women at festivals, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>El, Phoenician god, i. 13, 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Cronus, 166</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>El-Bùgât, festival of mourning for Tammuz in Harran, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elam, the kings of, their bones carried off by Ashurbanipal, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eleusis, Demeter and the king's son at, i. 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of oxen at, 292 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mysteries of Demeter at, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eli, the sons of, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elisha prophesies to music, i. 53, 54;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>finds water in the desert, 53, 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ellis, A. B., on sacred prostitution in West Africa, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on tattoo marks of priests, 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on an ordeal of chastity, 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emesa, sun-god Heliogabalus at, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Empedocles leaps into the crater of Etna, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emperor of China, funeral of an, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ἐναγίζειν distinguished from θύειν, i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enemy, charms to disable an, ii. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>England, harvest custom in, i. 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ennius, on Hora and Quirinus, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Entry of Osiris into the moon,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Enylus, king of Byblus, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephesus, Artemis of, i. 269;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hecate at, 291;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the priesthood of Apollo and Artemis at, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epidaurus, Aesculapius at, i. 80</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphany, the sixth of January, i. 305</l>
</lg>

<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>

<lg>
<l>Epirus, the kings of, their bones scattered by Lysimachus, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Equinox, the vernal, resurrection of Attis at the, i. 273, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of the Crucifixion assigned to the spring equinox, 307;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tradition that the world was created at the spring equinox, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erechtheum, sacred serpent in the, i. 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erechtheus, king of Athens, his incest with his daughter, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sacred serpent, 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eregli (the ancient Cybistra) in Cappadocia, i. 120, 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eresh-Kigal, Babylonian goddess, i. 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Erica</foreign>-tree, Osiris in the, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eriphyle, the necklace of, i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Erman, Professor A., on Anubis at Abydos, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on corn-stuffed effigies of Osiris, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the development of Egyptian religion, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Erme</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Nenneri</foreign>, gardens of Adonis in Sardinia, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eshmun, Phoenician deity, i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esne, the festal calendar of, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esquimaux of Alaska, their annual festival of the dead, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonian peasants regulate their sowing and planting by the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Esthonians, their ceremony at the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eternal life, initiate born again to, in the rites of Cybele and Attis, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etesian winds, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Etna, Mount, Typhon buried under, i. 156, 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the death of Empedocles on, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ashes of, 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings thrown into the craters of, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euboea subject to earthquakes, i. 211;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of threshing in, 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>harvest custom in, 238</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eudoxus, on the Egyptian festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eunuch, priests of the Mother Goddess, i. 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the service of Asiatic goddesses of fertility, 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in various lands, 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Attis tattooed with pattern of ivy, 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Cybele, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eunuchs, dances of, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dedicated to a goddess in India, 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, at Hierapolis-Bambyce, their rule as to the pollution of death, ii. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euripides on the death of Pentheus, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Europe, custom of showing money to the new moon in, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius on sacred prostitution, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 73 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euyuk in Cappadocia, Hittite palace at, i. 123, 132, 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bull worshipped at, 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evadne and Capaneus, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil Eye, boys dressed as girls to avert the, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bridegroom disfigured in order to avert the, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>disguises to avert the, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ewe farmers fear to wound the Earth goddess, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; people of Togo-land, their belief in the marriage of Sky with Earth, i. 282 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; speaking peoples of the Slave Coast, sacred prostitution among the, i. 65 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship pythons, 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exchange of dress between men and women in rites, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at marriage, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at circumcision, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exogamous clans in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcism by means of music, i. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Expiation for homicide, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman, for prodigies, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eye as a symbol of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sacrificial ox cut out, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Horus, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Evil, boys dressed as girls to avert the, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bridegroom disfigured in order to avert, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eyes of the dead, Egyptian ceremony of opening the, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ezekiel on the mourning for Tammuz, i. 11, 17, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Assyrian cavalry, 25 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the king of Tyre, 114</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>False Bride, custom of the ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farnell, Dr. L. R., on Greek religious music, i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1 and  3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on religious prostitution in Western Asia, 57 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 58 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the position of women in ancient religion, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Flamen Dialis, <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the children of living parents in ritual, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the festival of Laurel-bearing at Thebes, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on eunuch priests of Cybele, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Farwardajan, a Persian festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fast from bread in mourning for Attis, i. 272</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fasts observed by the worshippers of Cybele and Attis, i. 280;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Isis and Cybele, 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Father named after his son, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of a god, 51, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dead, worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the head of the family under a system of mother-kin, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -deity of the Hittites, the god of the thundering sky, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; God, his emblem the bull, i. 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Attis as the, 281 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>often less important than Mother Goddess, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -kin at Rome, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Mother, and Son divinities represented at Boghaz-Keui, i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>

<lg>
<l>Father Sky fertilizes Mother Earth, i. 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and mother, names for, i. 281;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as epithets of Roman gods and goddesses, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatherhood of God, the physical, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fauna, rustic Roman goddess, her relationship to Faunus, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faunus, old Roman god, his relationship to Fauna or the Good Goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feast of All Saints on November 1st, perhaps substituted for an old pagan festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instituted by Lewis the Pious, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of All Souls, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Christian, originally a pagan festival of the dead, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Golden Flower at Sardes, i. 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Lanterns in Japan, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Feet first, children born, custom observed at their graves, i. 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felkin, R. W. and C. T. Wilson, on the worship of the dead kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fellows, Ch., on flowers in Caria, i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Female-Kinship'/>
<l>Female kinship, rule of descent of the throne under, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> Mother-kin</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertility of ground thought to be promoted by prostitution, i. 39;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>promoted by marriage of women to serpent, 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goddesses of, served by eunuch priests, 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris as a god of, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fertilization of the fig, artificial, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festival of <q>the awakening of Hercules</q> at Tyre, i. 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Dead in Java, 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Flowers (<foreign rend='italic'>Anthesteria</foreign>), 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Joy (<foreign rend='italic'>Hilaria</foreign>) in the rites of Attis, 273;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Sais, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Crowning at Delphi, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Festivals of the Egyptian farmer, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Osiris, the official, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian readjustment of, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fetishism early in human history, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Field of the giants,</q> i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fig, artificial fertilization of the, at Rome in July, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fiji, chiefs buried secretly in, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fijian god of fruit-trees, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Lent, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fijians, their theory of earthquakes, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Financial oppression, Roman, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Finlay, George, on Roman financial oppression, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire, purification by, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 179 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persian reverence for, 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death in the, as an apotheosis, 179 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed able to impregnate women, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire, perpetual, in Zoroastrian religion, i. 191;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped, 191 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the temples of dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, the father of Romulus, Servius Tullius, and Caeculus, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -walk of the king of Tyre, i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of priestesses at Castabala, 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -worship in Cappadocia, i. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firmicus Maternus, on the mourning for Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on use of a pine-tree in the rites of Osiris, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>First-born, Semitic sacrifice of the, i. 110;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sacrifice of, at Jerusalem, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -fruits offered to the Baalim, i. 27;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to the Mother of the Gods, 280 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to dead chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Firstlings offered to the Baalim, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fish, soul of dead in, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fison, Rev. Lorimer, on Fijian god of earthquakes, i. 202 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on secret burial of chiefs in Fiji, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flail or scourge, an emblem of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for collecting incense, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flamen forbidden to divorce his wife, ii. <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Vulcan, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Dialis, the widowed, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>forbidden to touch a dead body, but allowed to attend a funeral, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bound to be married, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Dialis and Flaminica, i. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>assisted by boy and girl of living parents, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flamingoes, soul of a dead king incarnate in, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flaminica and her husband the Flamen Dialis, i. 45 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flax, omens from the growth of, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flower of the banana, women impregnated by the, i. 93</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; of Zeus,</q> i. 186, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flowers and leaves as talismans, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flute, skill of Marsyas on the, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; music, its exciting influence, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -players dressed as women at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flutes played in the laments for Tammuz, i. 9;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for Adonis, 225 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Food, virgins supposed to conceive through eating certain, i. 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a cause of conception in women, 96, 102, 103, 104, 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foreigners as kings, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fortuna Primigenia, goddess of Praeneste, daughter of Jupiter, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fortune of the city on coins of Tarsus, i. 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the guardian of cities, 164</l>
</lg>

<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>

<lg>
<l>Fossil bones in limestone caves, i. 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a source of myths about giants, 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foucart, P., identifies Dionysus with Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Four-handed Apollo, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fowler, W. Warde, on the celibacy of the Roman gods, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fra Angelico, his influence on Catholicism, i. 54 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, harvest custom in, i. 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>timber felled in the wane of the moon in, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fratres Arvales</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fravashis, the souls of the dead in the Iranian religion, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>French peasants regulate their sowing and planting by the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frey, the Scandinavian god of fertility, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frigento, Valley of Amsanctus near, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frodsham, Dr., on belief in conception without sexual intercourse, i. 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fruit-trees, worshippers of Osiris forbidden to injure, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fulgora, a Roman goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Funeral custom in Madagascar, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; pyre of Roman emperor, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rites of the Egyptians a copy of those performed over Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Osiris, described in the inscription of Denderah, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furies, their snakes, i. 88 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Furness, W. H., on the prostitution of unmarried girls in Yap, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaboon, Mpongwe kings of the, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>negroes of the, regulate their planting by the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gad, Semitic god of fortune, i. 164, 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gadabursi, a Somali tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gades (Cadiz), worship of Hercules (Melcarth), at, i. 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of Melcarth at, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galelareese of Halmahera, as to human sacrifices to volcanoes, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallas, their worship of serpents, i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galli, the emasculated priests of Attis, i. 266, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galton, Sir Francis, on the vale of the Adonis, i. 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Game with fruit-stones played by kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; law of the Njamus, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garden of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardens of Adonis, i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>charms to promote the growth of vegetation, 236 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 239;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in India, 239 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Bavaria, 244;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Sardinia, 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Sicily, 245;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Easter, 253 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardens of God, i. 123, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardner, Professor E. A. on date of the corn-reaping in Greece, i. 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garstang, Professor J., on sculptures at Ibreez, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 123 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hittite sculptures at Boghaz-Keui, 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Arenna, 136 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Syrian god Hadad, 163 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gathas</hi>, a part of the <hi rend='italic'>Zend-Avesta</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaul, worship of Cybele in, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gazelle Peninsula, New Britain, conduct of the natives in an earthquake, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Melanesians of the, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gazelles sacrificed at Egyptian funerals, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gebal, Semitic name of Byblus, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geese sacrificed at Egyptian funerals, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gellius, Aulus, his list of old Roman deities, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gellius, Cnaeus, on Mars and Nerio, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geminus, Greek astronomer, on the vague Egyptian year, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genital organs of Osiris, tradition as to the, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead man used to fertilize the fields, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Genius</foreign>, Roman, symbolized by a serpent, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Geographical and climatic conditions, their effect on national character, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>German peasants regulate their sowing and planting by the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germans, the ancient, their regard for the phases of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany, harvest custom in, i. 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaping over Midsummer fires in, 251;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popular superstition as to the influence of the moon in, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gezer, Canaanitish city, excavations at, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gezo, King, i. 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghineh, monument of Adonis at, i. 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghost of afterbirth thought to adhere to navel-string, ii. <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ghosts thought to impregnate women, i. 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the dead personated by living men, ii. <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giants, myths of, based on discovery of fossil bones, i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and gods, their battle, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giaour-Kalesi, Hittite sculptures at, i. 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilbert Islands, sacred stones in the, i. 108 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gill, Captain W., on a tribe in China governed by a woman, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gilyaks of the Amoor eat nutlets of stone-pine, i. 278 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>

<lg>
<l>Ginzel, Professor F. K., on the rise of the Nile, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Giraffes, souls of dead kings incarnate in, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Glaucus, son of Minos, restored to life, i. 186 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goat sacrificed by being hanged, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, children of, i. 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sons of, 78 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the physical fatherhood of, 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of, 123, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the burning of a, i. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the hanged, 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of earthquakes, i. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Godavari District, Southern India, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goddess, identified with priestess, i. 219;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>superiority of the, in the myths of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, ii. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goddesses, Cilician, i. 161 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>place infant sons of kings on fire to render them immortal, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of fertility served by eunuch priests, 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their superiority over gods in societies organized on mother-kin, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the development of, favoured by mother-kin, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gods, annual death and resurrection of, i. 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>personated by priests, 45, 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>married to sisters, 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their human wives, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>made by men and worshipped by women, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and giants, the battle of, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gold Coast of West Africa, the Tshi-speaking peoples of the, i. 69</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golden Flower, the Feast of the, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sea, the, i. 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Golgi in Cyprus, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goliath and David, i. 19 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gonds, ceremony of bringing back souls of the dead among the, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good Friday, effigies and sepulchres of Christ on, i. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Goddess (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Bona Dea</foreign>), her relationship to Faunus, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goowoong Awoo, volcano, children sacrificed to, i. 219</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordias and Midas, names of Phrygian kings, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gordon, E. M., on infant burial, i. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the festival of the dead in Bilaspore, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gouri, an Indian goddess of fertility, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gournia in Crete, prehistoric shrine at, i. 88 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grandmother, title of an African priest, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Earth thought to cause earthquakes, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grandparents, dead, worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grapes as divine emblem, i. 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grave of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human victims sacrificed at the, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; shrines of Shilluk kings, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead kings, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Graves, milk offered at, i. 87;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>childless women resort to, in order to ensure offspring, 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>illuminated on All Souls' Day, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the only places of sacrifice in the country of the Wahehe, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of kings, chiefs, and magicians kept secret, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices at, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Great burnings</q> for kings of Judah, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Marriage, annual festival of the dead among the Oraons of Bengal, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men, history not to be explained without the influence of, i. 311 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great religious systems founded by, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their influence on the popular imagination, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mother, popularity of her worship in the Roman empire, i. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; religious systems founded by individual great men, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religious ideals a product of the male imagination, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greece, date of the corn-reaping in, i. 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>modern, marriage customs in, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greek belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Church, ceremonies on Good Friday in the, i. 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; feast of All Souls in May, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; gods, discrimination of their characters, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mythology, Adonis in, i. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; notion as to birth from trees and rocks, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the noxious influence of moonshine on children, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; purification for homicide, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; use of music in religion, i. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; writers on the worship of Adonis, i. 223 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory IV. and the feast of All Saints, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grenfell, B. P., and A. S. Hunt on corn-stuffed effigies of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grimm, Jacob, on hide-measured lands, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grotto of the Sibyl, at Marsala, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Growth and decay of all things associated with the waxing and waning of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guarayos Indians of Bolivia, their presentation of children to the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>

<lg>
<l>Guardian spirits in the form of animals, i. 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in serpents, 83, 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guaycurus of Brazil, men dressed as women among the, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guevo Upas, the Valley of Poison, in Java, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gujrat District, Punjaub, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gurdon, Major P. R. T., on the Khasis of Assam, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gwanya, a worshipful dead chief, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gyges, king of Lydia, dedicates double-headed axe to Zeus, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gynaecocracy a dream, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadad, chief male deity of the Syrians, i. 15, 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Syrian god of thunder and fertility, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadadrimmon, i. 164 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the mourning of or for, 15 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Haddon, A. C., on worship of animal-shaped heroes, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian, human sacrifice suppressed in reign of, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hair, sacrifice of women's, i. 38;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to goddess of volcano, 218;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of head shaved in mourning for dead gods, 225;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be cut when the moon is waxing, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halasarna in Cos, rites of Apollo and</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules at, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halfdan, the Black, King of Norway, dismembered after death, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halicarnassus, worship of Pergaean Artemis at, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall of the Two Truths, the judgment hall in the other world, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Halmahera, the Galelareese of, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamaspathmaedaya, old Iranian festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilcar, his self-sacrifice at the battle of Himera, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Carthage, 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burns himself, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped after death, 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, Alexander, on dance of hermaphrodites in Pegu, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hamilton, Professor G. L., i. 57 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hammurabi, the code of, i. 71 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 72 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Handel, the harmonies of, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanged god, the, i. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanging as a mode of sacrifice, i. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hannah, the prayer of, i. 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hannibal, his prayers to Melcarth, i. 113;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his retirement from Italy, 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hanway, J., on worship of perpetual fires at Baku, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harmonia, the necklace of, i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>turned into a snake, 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harold the Fair-haired, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harp, the music of the, in religion, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harpalyce, her incest with her father, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harpocrates, the younger Horus, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harran, mourning of women for Tammuz in, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harrison, Miss J. E., on the hyacinth (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Delphinium Ajacis</foreign>), i. 314 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartland, E. S., on the reincarnation of the dead, i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on primitive paternity, 106 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvest, rites of, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual festival of the dead after, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>new corn offered to dead kings or chiefs at, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prayers to the spirits of ancestors at, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to dead chiefs at, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in Egypt, the date of, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; custom of throwing water on the last corn cut as a rain-charm, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Arabs of Moab, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hathor, Egyptian goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hattusil, king of the Hittites, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Havamal</foreign>, how Odin learned the magic runes in the, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawaii, the volcano of Kirauea in, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawes, Mrs., on date of the corn-reaping in Crete, i. 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawk, Isis in the form of a, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sacred bird of the earliest Egyptian dynasties, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>epithet regularly applied to the king of Egypt, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -town (Hieraconpolis) in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hawks carved on the bier of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hazael, king of Damascus, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Head-Feast</q> among the Dyaks of Borneo, i. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -hunting in Borneo, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heads of dead chiefs cut off and buried secretly, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, human, thought to promote the fertility of the ground and of women, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>used as guardians by Taurians and tribes of Borneo, 294 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heathen festivals displaced by Christian, i. 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; origin of Midsummer festival (festival of St. John), i. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heavenly Virgin or Goddess, mother of the Sun, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrew kings, traces of their divinity, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; names ending in <hi rend='italic'>-el</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>-iah</hi>, i. 79 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; prophecy, the distinctive character of, i. 75</l>
</lg>

<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>

<lg>
<l>Hebrew prophets, their resemblance to those of Africa, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hebrides, peats cut in the wane of the moon in the, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hecaerge, an epithet of Artemis, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hecate at Ephesus, i. 291;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes identified with Artemis, 292 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Zeus worshipped at Stratonicea, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hecatombeus, a Greek month, i. 314</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hehn, V., on derivation of name Corycian, i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helen of the Tree, worshipped in Rhodes, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliacal rising of Sirius, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helice, in Achaia, destroyed by earthquake, i. 203;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Poseidon worshipped at, 203 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliodorus, on the priesthood of Apollo and Artemis at Ephesus, ii. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliogabalus, sun-god at Emesa, i. 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sacrifice of children of living parents, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliopolis (Baalbec), in Syria, i. 163 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred prostitution at, 37, 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliopolis (the Egyptian), trial of the dead Osiris before the gods at, ii. <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hepding, H., on Attis, i. 263 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Catullus's poem <hi rend='italic'>Attis</hi>, 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the bath of Cybele's image, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hephaestus and hot springs, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heqet, Egyptian frog-goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hera's marriage with Zeus, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heraclids, Lydian dynasty of the, i. 182, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps Hittite, 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules identified with Melcarth, i. 16, 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slain by Typhon and revived by Iolaus, 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt on Mount Oeta, 111, 116, 211;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Gades, 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>women excluded from sacrifices to, 113 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Sandan, 125, 143, 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burns himself, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped after death, 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the itch of, 209;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dispute with Aesculapius, 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the patron of hot springs, 209 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>altar of, at Thermopylae, 210;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the effeminate, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priest of, dressed as a woman, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>vernal mysteries of, at Rome, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices to, at Rome, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the lion, i. 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Omphale, i. 182, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Sardanapalus, i. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Lydian, identical with the Cilician Hercules, i. 182, 184, 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; with the lion's scalp, Greek type of, i. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hereditary deities, i. 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herefordshire, soul-cakes in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herero, a Bantu tribe of German South-West Africa, the worship of the dead among the, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermaphrodite son of Sky and Earth, i. 282 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermaphrodites, dance of, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermes and Aegipan, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermesianax, on the death of Attis, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermus, river, i. 185, 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herod resorts to the springs of Callirrhoe, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodes Atticus, his benefaction at Thermopylae, i. 210</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herodotus on sanctuary of Aphrodite at Paphos, i. 34;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on religious prostitution, 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on wife of Bel, 71;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Cyrus and Croesus, 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sacrifices of Croesus to Apollo, 180 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on so-called monument of Sesostris, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the festival of Osiris at Sais, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the mourning for Osiris, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identifies Osiris with Dionysus, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the similarity between the rites of Osiris and Dionysus, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on human sacrifices offered by the wife of Xerxes, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heroes worshipped in form of animals, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hertz, W., on religious prostitution, i. 57 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 59 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hesse, custom at ploughing in, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hest</foreign>, the Egyptian name for Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hettingen in Baden, custom at sowing at, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hezekiah, King, his reformation, i. 25, 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of his reign, 25 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hibeh papyri, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hide-measured lands, legends as to, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hieraconpolis in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>representations of the Sed festival at, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hierapolis, the Syrian, festival of the Pyre or Torch at, i. 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred doves at, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great sanctuary of Astarte at, 269;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eunuch priests of Astarte at, 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, in the valley of the Maeander, cave of Pluto at, i. 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hot springs at, 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and <foreign rend='italic'>Hieropolis</foreign>, distinction between, i. 168 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -Bambyce, Atargatis the goddess of, i. 137, 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mysterious golden image at, 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules as to the pollution of death at, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hieroglyphics, Hittite, i. 124, 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>High-priest of Syrian goddess, i. 143 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Priestess, head of the State, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Highlanders, Scottish, on the influence of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Hilaria</foreign>, Festival of Joy in the rites of Attis, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill, G. F., on image of Artemis at Perga, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on legend of coins of Tarsus, 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on goddess 'Atheh, 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on coins of Mallus, 165 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hill Tout, C., on respect shown by the Indians of British Columbia for the animals and plants which they eat, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Himalayan districts of North-Western India, gardens of Adonis in the, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Himera, the battle of, i. 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hot springs of, 213 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoo burial of infants, i. 94;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage custom, old, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of perpetual fire, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hindoos of Northern India, their mode of drinking moonshine, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hinnom, the Valley of, i. 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of first-born children in, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippodamia, her incest with her father, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hirpini, valley of Amsanctus in the land of the, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hissar District, Punjaub, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>History not to be explained without the influence of great men, i. 311 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hittite, correct form of the national name Chatti or Hatti, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; costume, i. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 131</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; deity named Tark or Tarku, i. 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; god of thunder, i. 134, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; gods at Tarsus and Sardes, 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; hieroglyphics, i. 124, 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; inscription on Mount Argaeus, i. 190 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; priest or king, his costume, i. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sculptures at Carchemish, i. 38 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Ibreez, 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Bor (Tyana), 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Euyuk, 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Boghaz-Keui, 128 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Babylon, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Zenjirli, 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Giaour-Kalesi, 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Kara-Bel, 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Marash, 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Lydia, 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; seals of treaty, i. 136, 142 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 145 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Sun-goddess, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; treaty with Egypt, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hittites worship the bull, i. 123, 132;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their empire, language, etc., 124 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of mother-kin among the, 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hkamies of North Aracan, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ho tribe of Togoland, their kings buried secretly, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hofmayr, W., on the worship of Nyakang among the Shilluks, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hogarth, D. G., on relics of paganism at Paphos, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Corycian cave, 155 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Roman remains at Tarsus, 172 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hogs sacrificed to goddess of volcano, i. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hollis, A. C., on serpent-worship of the Akikuyu, i. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on serpent-worship, 84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Holy men</q> in Syria, i. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hommel, Professor F., on the Hittite deity Tarku, i. 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honey and milk offered to snakes, i. 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Honey-cakes offered to serpent, i. 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hope of immortality, the Egyptian, centred in Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hopladamus, a giant, i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hora and Quirinus, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horkos, the Greek god of oaths, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horned cap worn by priest or god, i. 123;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hittite god, 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; god, Hittite and Greek, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; lion, i. 127</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horns, as a religious emblem, i. 34;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by gods, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of a cow worn by Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horses sacrificed for the use of the dead, i. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lycurgus, king of the Edonians, torn in pieces by, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horus, the four sons of, in the likeness of hawks, ii. <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decapitates his mother Isis, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the eye of, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Edfu identified with the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the elder, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the younger, son of Isis and the dead Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accused by Set of being a bastard, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his combat with Set, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his eye destroyed by Set and restored by Thoth, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reigns over the Delta, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hose, Ch., and McDougall, W., on head-hunting in Borneo, i. 295 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hosea on religious prostitution, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Baalim, 75 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the prophet as a madman, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hot springs, worship of, i. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hercules the patron of, 209 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>resorted to by childless women in Syria, 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huligamma, Indian goddess, eunuchs dedicated to her, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human representatives of Attis, i. 285 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifice, substitutes for, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 285, 289, ii. 99, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sacrifices in worship of the moon, i. 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the Tauric Artemis, 115;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to Diomede at Salamis, 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered at earthquakes, 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered at irrigation
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
channels, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the kings of Ashantee and Dahomey, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to Dionysus, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered by the Mexicans for the maize, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the graves of the kings of Uganda, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to dead kings, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to dead chiefs, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to prolong the life of kings, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human victims thrown into volcanoes, i. 219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>uses made of their skins, 293;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as representatives of the corn-spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>killed with hoes, spades, and rakes, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hunger the root of the worship of Adonis, i. 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hurons, their burial of infants, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Huzuls of the Carpathians, their theory of the waning moon, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their cure for water-brash, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyacinth, son of Amyclas, killed by Apollo, i. 313;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his flower, 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb and festival, 314 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an aboriginal deity, 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sister Polyboea, 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps a deified king of Amyclae, i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyacinthia, the festival of Hyacinth, i. 314 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyacinthius, a Greek month, i. 315 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hybristica, an Argive festival, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hygieia, the goddess, i. 88 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hymns to Tammuz, i. 9;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the sun-god, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hyria in Cilicia, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibani of the Niger delta, their sacrifices to prolong the lives of kings and others, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibans or Sea Dyaks, their worship of serpents, i. 83.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Sea-Dyaks'>Sea Dyaks</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibn Batuta, Arab traveller, on funeral of emperor of China, i. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ibreez in Southern Cappadocia, i. 119 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>village of, 120 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hittite sculptures at, 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the god of, i. 119 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his horned cap, 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idalium in Cyprus, i. 50;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bilingual inscription of, 49 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Melcarth worshipped at, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ideals of humanity, two different, the heroic and the saintly, i. 300;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>great religious, a product of the male imagination, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ideler, L., on the date of the introduction of the fixed Alexandrian year, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Sothic period, 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignorance of paternity, primitive, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Il Mayek clan of the Njamus, their supposed power over irrigation water and the crops, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ilium, animals sacrificed by hanging at, i. 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illumination, nocturnal, at festival of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of graves on All Souls' Day, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ilpirra of Central Australia, their belief in the reincarnation of the dead, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Images of Osiris made of vegetable mould, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immortality, Egyptian hope of, centred in Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> sq., <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Impregnation'/>
<l>Impregnation of women by serpents, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the dead, 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by ghosts, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the flower of the banana, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>supposed, through eating food, 96, 102, 103, 104, 105;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by fire, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Conception'>Conception</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Isis by the dead Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; without sexual intercourse, belief in, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incense burnt at the rites of Adonis, i. 228;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burnt in honour of the Queen of Heaven, 228;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>collected by a flail, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incest with a daughter in royal families, reported cases of, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inconsistency of common thought, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Increase of the moon the time for increasing money, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, sacred women (dancing-girls) in, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnation of women by stone serpents in, 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial of infants in, 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of Adonis in, 239 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>eunuchs dedicated to a goddess in, 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>drinking moonlight as a medicine in, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indian ceremonies analogous to the rites of Adonis, i. 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; prophet, his objections to agriculture, i. 88 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Indians of tropical America represent the rain-god weeping, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of California, their annual festivals of the dead, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Brazil attend to the moon more than to the sun, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of San Juan Capistrano, their ceremony at the new moon, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Ucayali River in Peru, their greeting to the new moon, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of North America, effeminate sorcerers among the, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infant sons of kings placed by goddesses on fire, i. 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infants buried so as to ensure their rebirth, i. 91, 93 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burial of, at Gezer, 108 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Influence of great men on the popular imagination, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of mother-kin on religion, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ingarda tribe of West Australia, their belief as to the birth of children, i. 104</l>
</lg>

<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>

<lg>
<l>Ingleborough in Yorkshire, i. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inheritance of property under mother-kin, rules of, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Injibandi tribe of West Australia, their belief as to the birth of children, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Insect, soul of dead in, i. 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Insensibility to pain as a sign of inspiration, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspiration, insensibility to pain as sign of, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>savage theory of, i. 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, prophetic, under the influence of music, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 74;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through the spirits of dead kings and chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inspired men and women in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intercalation introduced to correct the vague Egyptian year, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the ancient Mexican calendar, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Inuus</foreign>, epithet applied to Faunus, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Invisible, charm to make an army, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iolaus, friend of Hercules, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iranian year, the old, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iranians, the old, their annual festival of the dead (Fravashis), ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, sacred oaks in, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irle, J., on the religion of the Herero, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iron not allowed to touch Atys, i. 286 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irrigation in ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, in Egypt, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices offered in connexion with, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isa or Parvati, an Indian goddess, i. 241</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaac, Abraham's attempted sacrifice of, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isaiah, on the king's pyre in Tophet, i. 177, 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>possible allusion to gardens of Adonis in, 236 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on dew, 247 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ishtar, great Babylonian goddess, i. 8, 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to Tammuz, 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; (Astarte) and Mylitta, i. 36, 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis, sister and wife of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of the festival of, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a cow or a woman with the head of a cow, i. 50, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invoked by Egyptian reapers, i. 232, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the form of a hawk, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the papyrus swamps, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the form of a swallow, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Byblus, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the well, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her search for the body of Osiris, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovers and buries the body of Osiris, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourns Osiris, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restores Osiris to life, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her tears supposed to swell the Nile, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her priest wears a jackal's mask, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>decapitated by her son Horus, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her temple at Philae, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her many names, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sister and wife of Osiris, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a corn-goddess, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her discovery of wheat and barley, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Ceres, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Demeter, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as the ideal wife and mother, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>refinement and spiritualization of, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popularity of her worship in the Roman empire, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her resemblance to the Virgin Mary, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sirius her star, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis and the king's son at Byblus, i. 180;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and the scorpions, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iswara or Mahadeva, an Indian god, i. 241, 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italian myths of kings or heroes begotten by the fire-god, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, hot springs in, i. 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Midsummer in, 254</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Itch of Hercules, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Itongo, an ancestral spirit (Zulu term, singular of Amatongo), ii. <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ivy, sacred to Attis, i. 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred to Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jablonski, P. E., on Osiris as a sun-god, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackal-god Up-uat, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jackal's mask worn by priest of Isis, 11, 85 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jamblichus on insensibility to pain as sign of inspiration, i. 169;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the purifying virtue of fire, 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>January, the sixth of, reckoned in the East the Nativity of Christ, i. 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Janus in Roman mythology, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -like deity on coins, i. 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Japan, annual festival of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jars, children buried in, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jason and Medea, i. 181 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jastrow, Professor M., on the festival of Tammuz, i. 10 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the character of Tammuz, 230 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Java, conduct of natives in an earthquake, i. 202 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Valley of Poison in, 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of volcanoes in, 220 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jawbone, the ghost of the dead thought to adhere to the, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and navel-string of Kibuka, the war-god of the Baganda, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jawbones, lower, of dead kings of Uganda preserved and worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ghosts of the kings supposed to attach to their jawbones, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<lg>
<l>Jâyi or Jawâra, festival in Upper India, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Jebel Hissar</foreign>, Olba, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jehovah in relation to thunder, i. 22 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to rain, 23 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jensen, P., on rock-hewn sculptures at Boghaz-Keui, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hittite inscription, 145 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Syrian god Hadad, 163 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jeremiah, on the prophet as a madman, i. 77;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on birth from stocks and stones, 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jericho, death of Herod at, i. 214</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerome, on the date of the month Tammuz, i. 10 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the worship of Adonis at Bethlehem, 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerusalem, mourning for Tammuz at, i. 11, 17, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Canaanite kings of, 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the returned captives at, 23;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Destroying Angel over, 24;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>besieged by Sennacherib, 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the religious orchestra at, 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>great burnings</q> for the kings at, 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the king's pyre at, 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Church of the Holy Sepulchre at, Good Friday ceremonies in the, 255 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sacrifice of first-born children at, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jewish priests, their rule as to the pollution of death, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews of Egypt, costume of bride and bridegroom among the, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joannes Lydus, on Phrygian rites at Rome, i. 266 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John Barleycorn, i. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johns, Dr. C. H. W., on Babylonian votaries, i. 71 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3 and  5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnston, Sir H. H., on eunuch priests on the Congo, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josephus, on worship of kings of Damascus, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Tyropoeon, 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Josiah, reforms of king, i. 17 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, 18 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 25, 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jualamukhi in the Himalayas, perpetual fires, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judah, laments for dead kings of, i. 20</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Judean maid impregnated by serpent, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian, the emperor, his entrance into Antioch, i. 227, 258;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Mother of the Gods, 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restores the standard cubit to the Serapeum, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian calendar introduced by Caesar, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; year, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juno, the Flaminica Dialis sacred to, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the wife of Jupiter, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Junod, Henri A., on the worship of the dead among the Thonga, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juok, the supreme god and creator of the Shilluks, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter, the husband of Juno, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the father of Fortuna Primigenia, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter and Juturna, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Dolichenus, i. 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justice and Injustice in Aristophanes, i. 209</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin Martyr on the resemblances of paganism to Christianity, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juturna in Roman mythology, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kabyles, marriage custom of the, to ensure the birth of a boy, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kadesh, a Semitic goddess, i. 137 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kai of German New Guinea, their belief in conception without sexual intercourse, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaikolans, a Tamil caste, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kaitish of Central Australia, their belief in the reincarnation of the dead, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalat el Hosn, in Syria, i. 78</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kalids</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>kaliths</foreign>, deities in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kalunga, the supreme god of the Ovambo, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kangra District, Punjaub, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kantavu, a Fijian island, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kanytelideis, in Cilicia, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kara-Bel, in Lydia, Hittite sculpture at, i. 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kariera tribe of West Australia, their beliefs as to the birth of children, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karma-tree, ceremony of the Mundas over a, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karo-Bataks, of Sumatra, their custom as to the first sheaf of rice at harvest, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karok Indians of California, their lamentations at hewing sacred wood, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Karunga, the supreme god of the Herero, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Katikiro</foreign>, Baganda term for prime minister, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kayans, their reasons for taking human heads, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keadrol, a Toda clan, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keb (Geb or Seb), Egyptian earth-god, father of Osiris, i. 6, 283 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ḳedeshim</foreign>, sacred men, i. 38 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 59, 72, 76, 107;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Jerusalem, 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to prophets, 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ḳedeshoth</foreign>, sacred women, i. 59, 72, 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kemosh, god of Moab, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kennett, Professor R. H., on David and Goliath, i. 19 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Elisha in the wilderness, 53 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on <hi rend='italic'>ḳedeshim</hi>, 73 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sacrifice of first-born children at Jerusalem, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kent's Hole, near Torquay, fossil bones in, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Keysser, Ch., on belief in conception without sexual intercourse, i. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khalij, old canal at Cairo, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>

<lg>
<l>Khangars of the Central Provinces, India, bridegroom and his father dressed as women at a marriage among the, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khasi tribes governed by kings, not queens, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khasis of Assam, their system of mother-kin, i. 46, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>goddesses predominate over gods in their religion, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rules as to the succession to the kingship among the, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Khent'/>
<l>Khent, early king of Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his reign, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb at Abydos, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb identified with that of Osiris, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khenti-Amenti, title of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khoiak, festival of Osiris in the month of, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Khyrim State, in Assam, i. 46;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>governed by a High Priestess, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kibuka, the war-god of the Baganda, a dead man, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his personal relics preserved at Cambridge, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kidd, Dudley, on the worship of ancestral spirits among the Bantus of South Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King, J. E., on infant burial, i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King, a masker at Carnival called the, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Tyre, his walk on stones of fire, i. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Uganda, his navel-string preserved and inspected every new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings as priests, i. 42;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as lovers of a goddess, 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>held responsible for the weather and the crops, 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marry their sisters, 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>slaughter human victims with their own hands, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torn in pieces, traditions of, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices to prolong the life of, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and magicians dismembered and their bodies buried in different parts of the country to fertilize it, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, dead, reincarnate in lions, i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped in Africa, 160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices offered to, 162, 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incarnate in animals, 162, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>consulted as oracles, 167, 171, 172, 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices to, 173;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the Barotse, 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, divinity of Semitic, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divinity of Lydian, 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Egypt worshipped as gods, i. 52;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>buried at Abydos, ii. <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps formerly slain in the character of Osiris, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as Osiris, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>renew their life by identifying themselves with the dead and risen Osiris, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>born again at the Sed festival, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps formerly put to death to prevent their bodily and mental decay, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kings, Hebrew, traces of divinity ascribed to, i. 20 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Shilluk, put to death before their strength fails, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Sweden answerable for the fertility of the ground, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their sons sacrificed, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingship at Rome a plebeian institution, i. 45;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>under mother-kin, rules as to succession to the, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa under mother-kin inherited by men, not women, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kingsley, Miss Mary H., on secret burial of chief's head, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kinnor</hi>, a lyre, i. 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kirauea, volcano in Hawaii, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divinities of, 217;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offerings to, 217 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiriwina, one of the Trobriand Islands, annual festival of the dead in, i. 56;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>snakes as reincarnations of the dead in, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>presentation of children to the full moon in, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiwai, an island off New Guinea, magic for the growth of sago in, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kiziba, a district of Central Africa, dead kings worshipped in, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>totemism in, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Klamath Indians of Oregon, their theory of the waning moon, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kocchs of North-Eastern India, succession to husband's property among the, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kois of Southern India, infant burial among the, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Komatis of Mysore, their worship of serpents, i. 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koniags of Alaska, their magical uses of the bodies of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Konkaus of California, their dance of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kosio</foreign>, a dedicated person, i. 65, 66, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kosti, in Thrace, carnival custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kotas, a tribe of Southern India, their priests not allowed to be widowers, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kretschmer, Professor P., on native population of Cyprus, i. 145 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Cybele and Attis, 287 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Krishna, Hindoo god, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuar, an Indian month, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kubary, J., on the system of mother-kin among the Pelew Islanders, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuinda, Cilician fortress, i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>

<lg>
<l>Kuki-Lushai, men dressed as women to deceive dangerous ghosts or spirits among the, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kuklia, Old Paphos, i. 33, 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kundi in Cilicia, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kupalo, figure of, passed across fire at Midsummer, i. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a deity of vegetation, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kupole's festival at Midsummer in Prussia, i. 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labraunda in Caria, i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Labrys</foreign>, Lydian word for axe, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laconia, subject to earthquakes, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lactantius, on the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lagash in Babylonia, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lago di Naftia in Sicily, i. 221 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lagrange, Father M. J., on the mourning for Adonis as a harvest rite, i. 231</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laguna, Pueblo village of New Mexico, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lakhubai, an Indian goddess, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lakor, theory of earthquakes in, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamas River in Cilicia, i. 149, 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamentations of Egyptian reapers, i. 232, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the savage for the animals and plants which he eats, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Cherokee Indians <q>after the first working of the crop,</q> <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Karok Indians at cutting sacred wood, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laments for Tammuz, i. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for dead kings of Judah, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lampblack used to avert the evil eye, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamps lighted to show the dead the way, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for the use of ghosts at the feast of All Souls, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lancashire, All Souls' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Landen, the battle of, i. 234</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lane, E. W., on the rise of the Nile, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lantana salvifolia</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanterns, the feast of, in Japan, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lanzone, R. V., on the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larnax Lapethus in Cyprus, Melcarth worshipped at, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Larrekiya, Australian tribe, their belief in conception without cohabitation, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lateran Museum, statue of Attis in the, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Latham, R. G., on succession to husband's property among the Kocchs, ii. <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laurel, gold wreath of, worn by priest of Hercules, i. 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Greek purificatory rites, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bearing, a festival at Thebes, in Boeotia, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leake, W. M., on flowers in Asia Minor, i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaping over Midsummer fires to make hemp or flax grow tall, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leaves and flowers as talismans, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lebanon, the forests of Mount, i. 14;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Aphrodite of the, 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Baal of the, 32;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the charm of the, 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lech, a tributary of the Danube, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lechrain, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lecky, W. E. H., on the influence of great men on the popular imagination, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legend of the foundation of Carthage and similar tales, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lehmann-Haupt, C. F., on the historical Semiramis, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lent, the Indian and Fijian, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo the Great, as to the celebration of Christmas, i. 305</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leonard, Major A. G., on sacrifices to prolong the lives of kings and others, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leprosy, king of Israel expected to heal, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lepsius, R., his identification of Osiris with the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leti, theory of earthquakes in, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Letopolis, neck of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Letts, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lewis the Pious, institutes the feast of All Saints, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leza, supreme being recognized by the Bantu tribes of Northern Rhodesia, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licinius Imbrex, on Mars and Nerio, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lightning thought by Caffres to be caused by the ghost of a powerful chief, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>no lamentations allowed for persons killed by, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Lights of the dead</q> to enable the ghosts to enter houses, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, three hundred and sixty-five, in the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lion, deity standing on a, i. 123 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 127;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the emblem of the Mother Goddess, 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as emblem of Hercules and the Heraclids, 182, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carried round acropolis of Sardes, 184, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god at Boghaz-Keui, the mystery of the, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Lydia, 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -slaying god, statue of, i. 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lions, dead kings reincarnate in, i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>carved, at gate, i. 128;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as emblems of the great Asiatic Mother-goddess, 137;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>deities seated on, 162;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>spirits of dead chiefs reincarnated in, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>

<lg>
<l>Living parents, children of, in ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loeboes, a tribe of Sumatra, exchange of costume between boys and girls among the, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Loryma in Caria, Adonis worshipped at, i. 227 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lots, Greek custom as to the drawing of, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lovers, term applied to the Baalim, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Low, Hugh, on Dyak treatment of heads of slain enemies, i. 295</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lua and Saturn, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luangwa, district of Northern Rhodesia, prayers to dead ancestors in, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucian, on religious prostitution, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on image of goddess at Hierapolis-Bambyce, 137 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the death of Peregrinus, 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on dispute between Hercules and Aesculapius, 209 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the ascension of Adonis, 225 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lugaba, the supreme god of the Bahima, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lunar sympathy, the doctrine of, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lung-fish clan among the Baganda, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luritcha of Central Australia, their belief in the reincarnation of the dead, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lushais, men dressed as women, women dressed as men, among the, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luxor, temples at, ii. <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyall, Sir Charles J., on the system of mother-kin among the Khasis, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycaonian plain, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycia, flowers in, i. 187 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mount Chimaera in, 221;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mother-kin in, ii. <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycian language, question of its affinity, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; men dressed as women in mourning, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycurgus, king of the Edonians, rent in pieces by horses, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lycus, valley of the, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lydia, prostitution of girls before marriage in, i. 38, 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the lion-god of, 184;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Burnt Land of, 193 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of mother-kin in, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lydian kings, their divinity, i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>held responsible for the weather and the crops, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyell, Sir Charles, on hot springs, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on volcanic phenomena in Syria and Palestine, 222 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyre as instrument of religious music, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the instrument of Apollo, 288</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lysimachus scatters the bones of the kings of Epirus, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ma, goddess of Comana in Pontus, i. 39, 265 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macalister, Professor R. A. Stewart, on infant burial at Gezer, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macdonald, Rev. James, on the worship of ancestors among the Bantus, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mace of Narmer, representation of the Sed festival on the, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>McLennan, J. F., on brother and sister marriages, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrobius, on the mourning Aphrodite, i. 30;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Egyptian year, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Osiris as a sun-god, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his solar theory of the gods, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the influence of the moon, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madagascar, vicarious sacrifice for a king in, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>men dressed as women in, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madonna and Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maeander, the valley of the, subject to earthquakes, i. 194;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctuaries of Pluto in the valley of the, 205, 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mafuie, the Samoan god of earthquakes, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magarsus in Cilicia, i. 169 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magic and religion, combination of, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magical ceremonies for the regulation of the seasons, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; dramas for the regulation of the seasons, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; uses made of the bodies of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magnesia, on the Maeander, worship of Zeus at, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahadeo and Parvati, Indian deities, i. 242, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahadeva, Indian god, i. 241</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahdi, an ancient, i. 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mahratta, dancing-girls in, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maia or Majestas, the wife of Vulcan, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maiau, hero in form of crocodile, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maiden, the (Persephone), the descent of, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malagasy use of children of living parents in ritual, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malay Peninsula, the Mentras or Mantras of the, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mallus in Cilicia, deities on coins of, i. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malta, bilingual inscription of, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Phoenician temples of, 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mamre, sacred oak or terebinth at, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandingoes of Senegambia, their attention to the phases of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maneros, chant of Egyptian reapers, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manes, first king of Lydia, i. 186 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manetho, on the Egyptian burnt-sacrifice of red-haired men, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Isis as
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
the discoverer of corn, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>quoted by Diodorus Siculus, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manichaeans, their theory of earthquakes, i. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manichaeus, the heretic, his death, i. 294 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manipur, the Tangkul Nagas of, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mantinea, Poseidon worshipped at, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maori priest catches the soul of a tree, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marash, Hittite monuments at, i. 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>March, festival of Attis in, i. 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the twenty-fifth of, tradition that Christ was crucified on, i. 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marduk, human wives of, at Babylon, i. 71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mariette-Pacha, A., on the burial of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marigolds used to adorn tombstones on All Souls' Day, ii. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marks, bodily, of prophets, i. 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage as an infringement of old communal rights, i. 40;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Sun and Earth, 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women to serpent-god, 66 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Adonis and Aphrodite celebrated at Alexandria, 224;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Sky and Earth, 282 with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Roman gods, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>exchange of dress between men and women at, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, sacred, of priest and priestess as representatives of deities, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented in the rock-hewn sculptures at Boghaz-Keui, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Cos, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; customs of the Aryan family, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of children of living parents in, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ensure the birth of boys, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriages of brothers with sisters in ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their intention to keep the property in the family, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mars, the father of Romulus and Remus, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Bellona, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Nerio, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsala in Sicily, Midsummer customs at, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marseilles, Midsummer custom at, i. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marshall, Mr. A. S. F., on the felling of timber in Mexico, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marsyas, his musical contest with Apollo and his death, i. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps a double of Attis, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Apollo, i. 55</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the river, i. 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin, M., on the cutting of peat in the Hebrides, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masai, of East Africa, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremonies at the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; boys wear female costume at circumcision, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rule as to the choice of a chief, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masnes, a giant, i. 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Masoka</foreign>, the spirits of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maspero, Sir Gaston, edits the Pyramid Texts, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the nature of Osiris, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masquerade at the Carnival in Thrace, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Masquerades at festivals of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massacres for sick kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massaya, volcano in Nicaragua, human victims sacrificed to, i. 219</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Massebah</foreign> (plural <foreign rend='italic'>masseboth</foreign>), sacred stone or pillar, i. 107, 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maternal uncle in marriage ceremonies in India, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maternity and paternity of the Roman deities, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Matriarchate,</q> i. 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maui, Fijian god of earthquakes, i. 202 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maundrell, H., on the discoloration of the river Adonis, i. 225 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maury, A., on the Easter ceremonies compared with those of Adonis, i. 257 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximus Tyrius, on conical image at Paphos, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>May, modern Greek feast of All Souls in May, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day, ceremony at Meiron in Galilee on the eve of, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -pole or Midsummer-tree in Sweden and Bohemia, i. 250</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medea and her magic cauldron, i. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medicine-men of Zulus, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Wiimbaio, 75 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mefitis, Italian goddess of mephitic vapours, i. 204, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megalopolis, battle of gods and giants in plain of, i. 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Megassares, king of Hyria, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meiners, C., on purification by blood, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meiron, in Galilee, burnings for dead Jewish Rabbis at, i. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mela's description of the Corycian cave, i. 155 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanesia, belief in conception without sexual intercourse in, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melanesian magicians buried secretly, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>

<lg>
<l>Melanesians, mother-kin among the, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of New Britain, their use of flowers and leaves as talismans, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melcarth, the god of Tyre, identified with Hercules, i. 16, 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Amathus in Cyprus, 32, 117;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burning of, 110 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped at Gades, 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melchizedek, king of Salem, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Melech</foreign> and Moloch, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meles, king of Lydia, banished because of a dearth, i. 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>causes lion to be carried round acropolis, 184</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melicertes, a form of Melcarth, i. 113</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melite in Phthia, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melito on the father of Adonis, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memnonium at Thebes, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memorial stones, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Memphis, head of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>oath of the kings of Egypt at, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Osiris in the month of Khoiak at, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Apis the sacred bull of, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the sanctuary of Serapis at, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Men, make gods, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as women at marriage, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as women to deceive dangerous spirits, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as women at circumcision, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and women inspired by the spirits of dead kings and chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <q>of God,</q> prophets, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Men Tyrannus, Phrygian moon-god, i. 284;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom as to pollution of death at his shrine, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mentras or Mantras of the Malay Peninsula, their tradition as to primitive man, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mephitic vapours, worship of, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mercurial temperament of merchants and sailors, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mesha, king of Moab, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices his first-born, 110</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Messiah, <q>the Anointed One,</q> i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meteor as signal for festival, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Metharme, daughter of Pygmalion, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Methide</foreign> plant growing over grave of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexican calendar, its mode of intercalation, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexicans, their human sacrifices for the maize, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mexico, rule as to the felling of timber in, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Meyer, Professor Eduard, on prophecy in Canaan, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Hittite language, 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on costume of Hittite priest or king, 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 141 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the rock-hewn sculptures of Boghaz-Keui, 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Anubis at Abydos, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the hawk as an Egyptian emblem, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the date of the introduction of the Egyptian calendar, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the nature of Osiris, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the relation of Byblus to Egypt, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Lycian language, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michael Angelo, the Pietà of, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Michaelmas, 29th September, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midas, the tomb of, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Gordias, names of Phrygian kings, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Midsummer, old heathen festival of, in Europe and the East, i. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at, 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bathing, pagan origin of the custom, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Bride and Bridegroom in Sweden, i. 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Day or Eve, custom of bathing on, i. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires and couples in relation to vegetation, i. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>leaping over the fires to make flax or hemp grow tall, 251</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milcom, the god of Ammon, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milk, serpents fed with, i. 84 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 87;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered at graves, 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mill, women mourning for Tammuz eat nothing ground in a mill, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milne, Mrs. Leslie, on the Shans, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton on the laments for Tammuz, i. 226 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minoan age of Greece, i. 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minucius Felix on the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miraculous births of gods and heroes, i. 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Mistress of Turquoise,</q> goddess at Sinai, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mitani, ancient people of Northern Mesopotamia, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithra, Persian deity, popularity of his worship in the Roman Empire, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the Unconquered Sun, 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithraic religion a rival to Christianity, i. 302;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Christmas borrowed from it, 302 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miztecs of Mexico, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mnevis, sacred Egyptian bull, ii. <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moa, theory of earthquakes in, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moab, Mesha, king of, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the wilderness of, 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the springs of Callirrhoe in, 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Arabs of, their custom at harvest, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their remedies for ailments, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moabite stone, the inscription on the, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 20 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 163 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>

<lg>
<l>Moabites burn the bones of the kings of Edom, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Models in cardboard offered to the dead instead of the things themselves, ii. <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedan peoples of North Africa, their custom of bathing at Midsummer, i. 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; saints as givers of children, i. 78 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedanism, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedans of Oude, their mode of drinking moonshine, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moire, sister of Tylon, i. 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moloch, meaning of the name, i. 15;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices of first-born children to, 178;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the king, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and <foreign rend='italic'>Melech</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mommsen, Th., on the date of the festival of Osiris at Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mongols, funeral customs of the, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monmouthshire, All Souls' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monomotapa, a Caffre king, his way of prolonging his life, ii. <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montanists, their view as to the date of Creation, i. 307 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Months, the Egyptian, table of, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moon, human victims sacrificed to the, i. 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>albinoes thought to be the offspring of the, 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popularly regarded as the cause of growth and decay, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>practical rules based on a theory of the influence of the, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popularly regarded as the source of moisture, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped by the agricultural Indians of tropical America, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>viewed as the husband of the sun, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Athenian superstition as to an eclipse of the, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>children presented to the, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to have a harmful influence on children, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the new, ceremonies at, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dances at, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of showing money to, or turning it in the pocket, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the waning, theories to explain, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be broken or eaten up, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Being of the Omahas, ii. <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the infant god, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god conceived as masculine, i. 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inspiration by the, 73;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Babylonia, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moonshine drunk as a medicine in India, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be beneficial to children, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Móooi, Tongan god who causes earthquakes, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moore, G. F., on the burnt sacrifice of children, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moravia, the feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moret, Alexandre, on Amenophis IV., ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Sed festival, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mori, a district of Central Celebes, belief of the natives as to a spirit in the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moriah, Mount, traditionally identified with Mount Zion, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morning Star, appearance of, perhaps the signal for the festival of Adonis, i. 258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morocco, custom of prostitution in an Arab tribe in, i. 39 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morrison, Rev. C. W., on belief of Australian aborigines as to childbirth, i. 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mostene in Lydia, double-headed axe at, i. 183 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mota, belief as to conception in women in, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Mother</q> and <q>Father</q> as epithets applied to Roman goddesses and gods, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, dead, worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Earth, festival in her honour in Bengal, i. 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fertilized by Father Sky, myth of, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Goddess of Western Asia, sacred prostitution in the worship of the, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lions as her emblems, 137, 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>her eunuch priests, 206;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Phrygia conceived as a Virgin Mother, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -kin, succession in royal houses with, i. 44;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>trace of, at Rome and Nemi, 45;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Khasis of Assam, 46, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Hittites, traces of, i. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and Mother Goddesses, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and father-kin, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>favours the superiority of goddesses over gods in religion, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its influence on religion, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Pelew Islanders, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>does not imply that government is in the hands of women, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Melanesians, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Lycia, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in ancient Egypt, <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of, in Lydia and Cos, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>favours the development of goddesses, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Female-Kinship'>Female kinship</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of a god, i. 51, 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the gods, first-fruits offered to the, i. 280 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>popularity of her worship in the Roman Empire, 298 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Plastene on Mount Sipylus, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Mother's Air,</q> a tune on the flute, i. 288</l>
</lg>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<lg>
<l><q>Mothers of the Clan</q> in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Motlav, belief as to conception in women in, i. 98</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mournful character of the rites of sowing, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mourning for Attis, i. 272;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>for the corn-god at midsummer, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; costume of men in Lycia, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps a mode of deceiving the ghost, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mouth of the dead, Egyptian ceremony of opening the, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moylar, male children of sacred prostitutes, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mpongwe kings of the Gaboon, buried secretly, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mugema</foreign>, the earl of Busiro, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mukasa, the chief god of the Baganda, probably a dead man, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gives oracles through a woman, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Mukuru</foreign>, an ancestor (plural <foreign rend='italic'>Ovakuru</foreign>, ancestors), ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Müller, Professor W. Max, on Hittite name for god, i. 148 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mundas of Bengal, gardens of Adonis among the, i. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mungarai, Australian tribe, their belief in the reincarnation of the dead, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murder of children to secure their rebirth in barren women, i. 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Murli, female devotee, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Music as a means of prophetic inspiration, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 74;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in exorcism, 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and religion, 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Musquakie Indians, infant burial among the, i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mutilation of dead bodies of kings, chiefs, and magicians, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to prevent their souls from becoming dangerous ghosts, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mycenae, royal graves at, i. 33, 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mycenaean age of Greece, i. 34</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mylasa in Caria, i. 182 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mylitta, Babylonian goddess, sacred prostitution in her worship, i. 36, 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myrrh or Myrrha, the mother of Adonis, i. 43, 227 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree, Adonis born of a, i. 227, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysore, sacred women in, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Komatis of, 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysteries of Sabazius, i. 90 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Attis, 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myth and ritual of Attis, i. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myths supposed to originate in verbal misapprehensions or a disease of language, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Italian, of kings or heroes begotten by the fire-god, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naaburg, in Bavaria, custom at sowing at, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Naaman, wounds of the,</q> Arab name for the scarlet anemone, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Naga</foreign>, serpent god, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naga-padoha, the agent of earthquakes, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahanarvals, a German tribe, priest dressed as a woman among the, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nahr Ibrahim, the river Adonis, i. 14, 28</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Namal tribe of West Australia, their belief as to the birth of children, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Names, royal, signifying relation to deity, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Semitic personal, indicating relationship to a deity, 51;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hebrew, ending in <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>-el</foreign> or <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>-iah</foreign>, 79 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nana, the mother of Attis, i. 263, 269, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nandi, the, of British East Africa, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82, 85;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their ceremony at the ripening of the eleusine grain, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>boys dressed as women and girls dressed as men at circumcision among the, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nanjundayya, H. V., on serpent worship in Mysore, i. 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naples, grotto <foreign rend='italic'>del cani</foreign> at, i. 205 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of bathing on St. John's Eve at, 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Narmer, the mace of, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>National character partly an effect of geographical and climatic conditions, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nativity of the Sun at the winter solstice, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural calendar of the husbandman, shepherd, and sailor, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navel-string of the king of Uganda preserved and inspected every new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Navel-strings of dead kings of Uganda preserved, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ghosts of afterbirths thought to adhere to, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>preserved by the Baganda as their twins and as containing the ghosts of their afterbirths, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ndjambi, Njambi, Njame, Zambi, Nyambe, etc., name of the supreme god among various tribes of Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, with note 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Karunga, the supreme god of the Herero, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nebseni, the papyrus of, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neith or Net, an Egyptian goddess, i. 282 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nekht, the papyrus of, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>

<lg>
<l>Nemi, Dianus and Diana at, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nephthys, Egyptian goddess, sister of Osiris and Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourns Osiris, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neptune and Salacia, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nerio and Mars, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>New birth through blood in the rites of Attis, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>savage theory of, 299;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Egyptian kings at the Sed festival, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Britain, theory of earthquakes in, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Guinea, German, the Kai of, i. 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Tami of, 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mexico, the Pueblo Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; moon, ceremonies at the, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; World, bathing on St. John's Day in the, i. 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All Souls' Day in the, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Year's Day, festival of the dead on, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Zealand, Rotomahana in, i. 207, 209 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newberry, Professor P. E., on Osiris as a cedar-tree god, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newman, J. H., on music, i. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ngai, God, i. 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ngoni, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nguruhi, the supreme god of the Wahehe, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Niambe, the supreme god of the Barotse, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nias, conduct of the natives of, in an earthquake, i. 201 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>head-hunting in, 296 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicaragua, Indians of, sacrifice human victims to volcanoes, i. 219</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nietzold, J., on the marriage of brothers with sisters in ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nigmann, E., on the religion of the Wahehe, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nikunau, one of the Gilbert Islands, sacred stones in, i. 108 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nile, the rise and fall of the, ii. <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rises at the summer solstice in June, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>commanded by the King of Egypt to rise, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be swollen by the tears of Isis, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gold and silver thrown into the river at its rising, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the rise of, attributed to Serapis, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the <q>Bride</q> of the, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nilsson, Professor M. P., on custom of sacred prostitution, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 57 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 58 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sacrifice of a bull to Zeus, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nineveh, the end of, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Njamus, the, of British East Africa, their sacrifices at irrigation channels, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Normandy, rolling in dew on St. John's Day in, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Northern Territory, Australia, beliefs as to the birth of children in the, i. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nottinghamshire, harvest custom in, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>November, festivals of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the month of sowing in Egypt, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novitiate of priests and priestesses, i. 66, 68</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nullakun tribe of Australia, their belief as to the birth of children, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nut, Egyptian sky-goddess, mother of Osiris, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in a sycamore tree, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nutlets of pines used as food, i. 278 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nutritive and vicarious types of sacrifice, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyakang, the first of the Shilluk kings, worshipped as the god of his people, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incarnate in various animals, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his mysterious disappearance, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his graves, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>historical reality of, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his relation to the creator Juok, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared to Osiris, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nymphs of the Fair Crowns at Olympia, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nysa, in the valley of the Maeander, i. 205, 206 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of bull at, 292 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nyuak, L., on guardian spirits of Sea Dyaks, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oak or terebinth, sacred at Mamre, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oath of Egyptian kings not to correct the vague Egyptian year by intercalation, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obelisk, image of Astarte, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obelisks, sacred, at Gezer, i. 108</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obscene images of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Octennial cycle, old, in Greece, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>October, the first of, a great Saxon festival, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odilo, abbot of Clugny, institutes feast of All Souls, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odin, hanged on a tree, i. 290;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human victims dedicated by hanging to, 290;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>king's sons sacrificed to, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oenomaus, king of Pisa, his incest with his daughter, i. 44 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oeta, Mount, Hercules burnt on, i. 111, 116, 211</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Offerings to dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oil, holy, poured on king's head, i. 21;</l>
</lg>

<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>

<lg>
<l>poured on sacred stones, 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as vehicle of inspiration, 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olba, priestly kings of, i. 143 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the name of, 148;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the ruins of, 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Old Woman of the corn, mythical being of the Cherokee Indians, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olive of the Fair Crown at Olympia, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -branches carried in procession and hung over doors at Athens, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olo Ngadjoe, the, of Borneo, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olonets, Russian Government of, festival of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympia, the quack Peregrinus burns himself at, i. 181;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the cutting of the olive-branches to form the victors' crowns at, ii. 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympic festival based on an octennial cycle, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Olympus, Mount, in Cyprus, i. 32</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omahas, Indian tribe of North America, effeminate men among the, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omonga, a rice-spirit who lives in the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Omphale and Hercules, i. 182, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>On, King of Sweden. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Aun'>Aun</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oodeypoor, in Rajputana, gardens of Adonis at, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opening the eyes and mouth of the dead, Egyptian funeral rite, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Operations of husbandry regulated by observation of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ops, the wife of Saturn, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to Consus, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oracles given by the spirits of dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oraons of Bengal, their annual marriage of the Sun and Earth, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of Adonis among the, 240;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orcus, Roman god of the lower world, his marriage celebrated by the pontiffs, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ordeal of chastity, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orestes at Castabala, i. 115</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orgiastic rites of Cybele, i. 278</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oriental mind untrammelled by logic, i. 4 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; religions in the West, i. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their influence in undermining ancient civilization, 299 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>importance attached to the salvation of the individual soul in, 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origen, on the refusal of Christians to fight, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origin of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orion, appearance of the constellation, a signal for sowing, i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orpheus, prophet and musician, i. 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the legend of his death, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orwell in Cambridgeshire, harvest custom at, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oschophoria, vintage festival at Athens, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osirian mysteries, the hall of the, at Abydos, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris identified with Adonis and Attis, i. 32, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>myth of, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his birth, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>introduces the cultivation of corn and the vine, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his violent death, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Byblus, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body rent in pieces, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the graves of, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dead body sought and found by Isis, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tradition as to his genital organs, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourned by Isis and Nephthys, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invited to come to his house, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restored to life by Isis, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>king and judge of the dead, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body the first mummy, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the funeral rites performed over his body the model of all funeral rites in Egypt, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>all the Egyptian dead identified with, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his trial and acquittal in the court of the gods, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented in art as a royal mummy, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>specially associated with Busiris and Abydos, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his tomb at Abydos, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>official festivals of, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his sufferings displayed in a mystery at night, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his festival in the month of Athyr, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dramatic representation of his resurrection in his rites, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his images made of vegetable mould, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the funeral rites of, described in the inscription of Denderah, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his festival in the month of Khoiak, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his <q>garden,</q> <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ploughing and sowing in the rites of, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burial of, in his rites, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the holy sepulchre of, under Persea-trees, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented with corn sprouting from his dead body, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his resurrection depicted on the monuments, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a corn-god, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>corn-stuffed effigies of, buried with the dead as a symbol of resurrection, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of the celebration of his resurrection at Rome, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the nature of, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his severed limbs placed on a corn-sieve, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human victims sacrificed by kings at the grave of, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suggested explanations of his dismemberment, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sometimes explained by the ancients as a personification of the corn, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a tree-spirit, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his image made out of a pine-tree, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his emblems the crook and scourge or flail, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, compare 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his backbone represented by the <hi rend='italic'>ded</hi> pillar, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted as a cedar-tree god, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his soul in a bird, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented as a mummy enclosed in a tree, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>obscene images of, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a god of fertility, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Dionysus, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a god of the dead, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>universal popularity of his worship, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted by some as the sun, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, reasons for rejecting this interpretation, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death and resurrection interpreted as the decay and growth of vegetation, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his body broken into fourteen parts, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted as the moon by some of the ancients, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reigned twenty-eight years, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his soul thought to be imaged in the sacred bull Apis, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with the moon in hymns, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented wearing on his head a full moon within a crescent, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>distinction of his myth and worship from those of Adonis and Attis, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his dominant position in Egyptian religion, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the origin of, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his historical reality asserted in recent years, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his temple at Abydos, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his title Khenti-Amenti, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared to Charlemagne, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the question of his historical reality left open, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death still mourned in the time of Athanasius, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his old type better preserved than those of Adonis and Attis, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Osiris, Adonis, Attis, their mythical similarity, i. 6, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Adonis, similarity between their rites, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Dionysus, similarity between their rites, ii. <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; of the mysteries,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -Sep, title of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ostrich-feather, king of Egypt supposed to ascend to heaven on an, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otho, the emperor, addicted to the worship of Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oulad Abdi, Arab tribe of Morocco, i. 39 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oura, ancient name of Olba, i. 148, 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ourwira, theory of earthquakes in, i. 199</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovambo, the, of German South-West Africa, their ceremony at the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the worship of the dead among the, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovid, on the story of Pygmalion, i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Owl regarded as the guardian spirit of a tree, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ox substituted for human victim in sacrifice, i. 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>embodying corn-spirit sacrificed at Athens, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>black, used in purificatory ceremonies after a battle, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ozieri, in Sardinia, St. John's festival at, i. 244</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pacasmayu, the temple of the moon at, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Padmavati, an Indian goddess, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pagan origin of the Midsummer festival (festival of St. John), i. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paganism and Christianity, their resemblances explained as diabolic counterfeits, i. 302, 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Παῖς ἀμφιθαλής, a boy whose parents are both alive, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palatinate, the Upper, the feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, religious prostitution in, i. 58;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of the corn-reaping in, 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestinian Aphrodite, i. 304 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestrina, the harmonies of, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pampa del Sacramento, Peru, earthquakes in, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pampas, bones of extinct animals in the, i. 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pamyles, an Egyptian, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pandharpur, in the Bombay Presidency, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panaghia Aphroditessa at Paphos, i. 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panku, a being who causes earthquakes, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papas, a name for Attis, i. 281, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paphlagonian belief that the god is bound fast in winter, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paphos in Cyprus, i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sanctuary of Aphrodite at, 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founded by Cinyras, 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papyrus of Nebseni, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Nekht, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; swamps, Isis in the, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parilia and the festival of St. George, i. 308</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parr, Thomas, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parvati or Isa, an Indian goddess, i. 241, 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pasicyprus, king of Citium, i. 50 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patagonia, funeral customs of Indians of, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patagonians, effeminate priests or sorcerers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paternity, primitive ignorance of, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>unknown in primitive savagery, 282</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and maternity of the Roman deities, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paton, W. R., on modern Greek feast of All Souls in May, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patrae, Laphrian Artemis at, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>

<lg>
<l>Pausanias on the necklace of Harmonia, i. 32 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on bones of superhuman size, 157 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on offerings to Etna, 221 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Hanged Artemis, 291 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Payne, E. J., on the origin of moon-worship, ii. <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pegasus and Bellerophon, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pegu, dance of hermaphrodites in, i. 271 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peking, Ibn Batuta at, i. 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pélé, goddess of the volcano Kilauea in Hawaii, i. 217 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelew Islanders, their system of mother-kin, ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>predominance of goddesses over gods among them, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>customs of the, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Islands and the ancient East, parallel between, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prostitution of unmarried girls in, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>custom of slaying chiefs in the, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelion, Mount, sacrifices offered on the top of, at the rising of Sirius, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peloponnese, worship of Poseidon in, i. 203</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelops restored to life, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peneus, the river, at Tempe, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pennefather River in Queensland, belief of the natives as to the birth of children, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pentheus, king of Thebes, rent in pieces by Bacchanals, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peoples of the Aryan stock, annual festivals of the dead among the, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepi the First, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his pyramid, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perasia, Artemis, at Castabala, i. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peregrinus, his death in the fire, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perga in Pamphylia, Artemis at, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Periander, tyrant of Corinth, his burnt sacrifice to his dead wife, i. 179</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perigord, rolling in dew on St. John's Day in, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peritius, month of, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perpetual holy fire in temples of dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; fires worshipped, i. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perrot, G., on rock-hewn sculptures at Boghaz-Keui, i. 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persea-trees in the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>growing over the tomb of Osiris, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persephone, name applied to spring, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Aphrodite, their contest for Adonis, i. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Pluto, temple of, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perseus, the virgin birth of, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persian reverence for fire, i. 174 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persian fire-worship and priests, 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Personation of gods by priests, i. 45, 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peru, earthquakes in, i. 202;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice of sons in, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peruvian Indians, their theory of earthquakes, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pescara River, in the Abruzzi, i. 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pescina in the Abruzzi, Midsummer custom at, i. 246</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pessinus, image of Cybele at, i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priests called Attis at, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>local legend of Attis at, 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>image of the Mother of the Gods at, 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>people of, abstain from swine, 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>high-priest of Cybele at, 285</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrarch at Cologne on St. John's Eve, i. 247 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrie, Professor W. M. Flinders, on the date of the corn-reaping in Egypt and Palestine, i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Sed festival, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the marriage of brothers with sisters in Egypt, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petrified cascades of Hierapolis, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petroff, Ivan, on a custom of the Koniags of Alaska, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phamenoth, an Egyptian month, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phaophi, an Egyptian month, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pharnace, daughter of Megassares, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phatrabot, a Cambodian month, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phidias, his influence on Greek religion, i. 54 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philadelphia, subject to earthquakes, i. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philae, Egyptian relief at, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mystic representation of Osiris in the temple of Isis at, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sculptures in the temple of Isis at, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the grave of Osiris at, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the dead Osiris in the sculptures at, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philo of Alexandria on the date of the corn-reaping, i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philocalus, calendar of, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 304 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, 307 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy, school of, at Tarsus, i. 118</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philostephanus, Greek historian, i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phoenician temples in Malta, i. 35;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred prostitution in, 37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings in Cyprus, i. 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phoenicians in Cyprus, i. 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygia, Attis a deity of, i. 263;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of Cybele in, 274 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>indigenous race of, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygian belief that the god sleeps in winter, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cap of Attis, i. 279</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; cosmogony, i. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings named Midas and Gordias, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>

<lg>
<l>Phrygian moon-god, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; priests named Attis, i. 285, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phrygians, invaders from Europe, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pietà</foreign> of Michael Angelo, i. 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pig's blood used in exorcism and purification, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Pigs'/>
<l>Pigs sacrificed annually to the moon and Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Swine'>Swine</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pillars as a religious emblem, i. 34;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred, in Crete, 107 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pindar on the music of the lyre, i. 55;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Typhon, 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pine-cones symbols of fertility, i. 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thrown into vaults of Demeter, 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the monuments of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; seeds or nutlets used as food, i. 278</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -tree in the myth and ritual of Attis, i. 264, 265, 267, 271, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 285, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Marsyas hung on a, i. 288;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in relation to human sacrifices, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pentheus on the, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the rites of Osiris, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pipiles of Central America expose their seeds to moonlight, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piraeus, processions in honour of Adonis at, i. 227 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pirates, the Cilician, i. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Pitr Pāk</foreign>, the Fortnight of the Manes, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pitrè, G., on Good Friday ceremonies in Sicily, i. 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Placenta'/>
<l>Placenta, Egyptian standard resembling a, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Afterbirth'>Afterbirth</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Placianian Mother, a form of Cybele, worshipped at Cyzicus, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plastene, Mother, on Mount Sipylus, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, on gardens of Adonis, i. 236 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plautus on Mars and Nerio, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pleiades worshipped by the Abipones, i. 258 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the setting of, the time of sowing, ii. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny, on the date of harvest in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the influence of the moon, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the grafting of trees, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the time for felling timber, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plotinus, the death of, i. 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughing, Prussian custom at, i. 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and sowing, ceremony of, in the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ploughmen and sowers drenched with water as a rain-charm, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch on the double-headed axe of Zeus Labrandeus, i. 182;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the myth of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Harpocrates, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Osiris at Byblus, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the rise of the Nile, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the mournful character of the rites of sowing, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his use of the Alexandrian year, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on an Egyptian ceremony at the winter solstice, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the date of the death of Osiris, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the festival of Osiris in the month of Athyr, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the dating of Egyptian festivals, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the rites of Osiris, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the grave of Osiris, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the similarity between the rites of Osiris and Dionysus, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Flamen Dialis, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Flaminica Dialis, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pluto, the breath of, i. 204, 205;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>places or sanctuaries of, 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cave and temple of, at Acharaca, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Plutonia</foreign>, places of Pluto, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pollution of death, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polo, Marco, on custom of people of Camul, i. 39 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polyboea, sister of Hyacinth, i. 314, 316;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Artemis or Persephone, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polyidus, a seer, i. 186 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polynesian myth of the separation of earth and sky, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomegranate causes virgin to conceive, i. 263, 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomegranates forbidden to worshippers of Cybele and Attis, i. 280 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pomona and Vertumnus, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pompey the Great, i. 27</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pondomisi, a Bantu tribe of South Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontiffs, the Roman, their mismanagement of the Julian calendar, ii. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>celebrated the marriage of Orcus, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pontus, sacred prostitution in, i. 39, 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Populonia, a Roman goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Port Darwin, Australia, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porta Capena at Rome, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poseidon the Establisher or Securer, i. 195 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the earthquake god, 195, 202 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Demeter, i. 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Possession of priest or priestess by a divine spirit, i. 66, 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 72 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by the spirits of dead chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potniae in Boeotia, priest of Dionysus killed at, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pots of Basil on St. John's Day in Sicily, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potter in Southern India, custom observed by a, i. 191 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Potters in Uganda bake their pots when the moon is waxing, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Praeneste, Fortuna Primigenia, goddess of, ii. <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>founded by Caeculus, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prague, the feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayers to dead ancestors, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to dead kings, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>

<lg>
<l>Pregnancy, causes of, unknown, i. 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Australian beliefs as to the causes of, 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestess identified with goddess, i. 219;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>head of the State under a system of mother-kin, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestesses more important than priests, i. 45, 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priesthood vacated on death of priest's wife, i. 45;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hercules at Tarsus, 143</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priestly dynasties of Asia Minor, i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; king and queen personating god and goddess, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings, i. 42, 43;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Olba, 143 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adonis personated by, 223 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Priests personate gods, i. 45, 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>tattoo-marks of, 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to be widowers, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Jewish, their rule as to the pollution of death, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as women, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Astarte, kings as, i. 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Attis, the emasculated, i. 265, 266</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Zeus at the Corycian cave, i. 145, 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procession to the Almo in the rites of Attis, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Processions carved on rocks at Boghaz-Keui, i. 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in honour of Adonis, 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 227 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 236 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procreation, savage ignorance of the causes of, i. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Procris, her incest with her father Erechtheus, i. 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Profligacy of human sexes supposed to quicken the earth, i. 48</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Property, rules as to the inheritance of, under mother-kin, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>landed, combined with mother-kin tends to increase the social importance of women, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecy, Hebrew, distinctive character of, i. 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophet regarded as madman, i. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophetesses inspired by dead chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inspired by gods, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophetic inspiration under the influence of music, i. 52 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 74;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>through the spirits of dead kings and chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; marks on body, i. 74</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; water drunk on St. John's Eve, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophets in relation to <hi rend='italic'>ḳedeshim</hi>, i. 76;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or mediums inspired by the ghosts of dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Hebrew, their resemblance to those of Africa, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophets of Israel, their religious and moral reform, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Propitiation of deceased ancestors, i. 46</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prostitution, sacred, before marriage, in Western Asia, i. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suggested origin of, 39 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Western Asia, alternative theory of, 57 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in India, 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Africa, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of unmarried girls in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Yap, one of the Caroline Islands, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Provence, bathing at Midsummer in, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prussia, customs at ploughing and harvest in, i. 238;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Midsummer in, 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pteria, captured by Croesus, i. 128</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy Auletes, king of Egypt, i. 43</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy and Berenice, annual festival in honour of, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy I. and Serapis, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy III. Euergetes, his attempt to correct the vague Egyptian year by intercalation, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy V. on the Rosetta Stone, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ptolemy Soter, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pumi-yathon, king of Citium and Idalium, i. 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Punjaub, belief in the reincarnation of infants in the, i. 94</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puppet substituted for human victim, i. 219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purification by fire, i. 115 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 179 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by pig's blood, 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Apollo at Tempe, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purificatory ceremonies after a battle, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyanepsion, an Athenian month, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pygmalion, king of Citium and Idalium in Cyprus, i. 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, king of Cyprus, i. 41, 49</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, king of Tyre, i. 50</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Aphrodite, i. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pymaton of Citium, i. 50 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyramid Texts, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>intended to ensure the life of dead Egyptian kings, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris and the sycamore in the, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the mention of Khenti-Amenti in the, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyramus, river in Cilicia, i. 165, 167, 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pyre at festivals of Hercules, i. 116;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Tarsus, 126;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of dead kings at Jerusalem, 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; or Torch, name of great festival at the Syrian Hierapolis, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythian games, their period, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Python worshipped by the Baganda, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, human wives of the, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>

<lg>
<l>Pythons worshipped in West Africa, i. 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dead chiefs reincarnated in, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Quail-hunt,</q> legend on coins of Tarsus, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quails sacrificed to Hercules (Melcarth), i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>migration of, 112</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quatuordecimans of Phrygia celebrate the Crucifixion on March 25th, i. 307 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queen of Egypt the wife of Ammon, i. 72</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Heaven, i. 303 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>incense burnt in honour of the, 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Queensland, aborigines of, their beliefs as to the birth of children, i. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quirinus and Hora, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ra, the Egyptian sun-god, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with many originally independent local deities, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabbah, captured by David, i. 19</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rabbis, burnings for dead Jewish, i. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rain procured by bones of the dead, i. 22;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excessive, ascribed to wrath of God, 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>instrumental in rebirth of dead infants, 95;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>regarded as the tears of gods, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to be controlled by the souls of dead chiefs, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -charm in rites of Adonis, i. 237;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>by throwing water on the last corn cut, 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god represented with tears running from his eyes, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rainbow totem, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rainless summer on the Mediterranean, i. 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rajaraja, king, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rajputana, gardens of Adonis in, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rambree, sorcerers dressed as women in the island of, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rameses II., his treaty with the Hittites, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his order to the Nile, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramman, Babylonian and Assyrian god of thunder, i. 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rams, testicles of, in the rites of Attis, i. 269</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ramsay, Sir W. M., on rock-hewn sculptures at Boghaz-Keui, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 137 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on priest-dynasts of Asia Minor, 140 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the god Tark, 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the name Olba, 148 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on <hi rend='italic'>Hierapolis</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Hieropolis</hi>, 168 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Attis and Men, 284 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on cruel death of the human representative of a god in Phrygia, 285 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Raoul-Rochette on Asiatic deities with lions, i. 138 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the burning of doves to Adonis, 147 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on apotheosis by death in the fire, 180 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ratumaimbulu, Fijian god of fruit-trees, i. 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Readjustment of Egyptian festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reapers, Egyptian, their lamentations, i. 232, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>invoke Isis, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rebirth of infants, means taken to ensure the, i. 91, 93 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the dead, precautions taken to prevent, 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Egyptian kings at the Sed festival, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Red the colour of Lower Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -haired men burnt by Egyptians, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reform, the prophetic, in Israel, i. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reformations of Hezekiah and Josiah, i. 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rehoboam, King, his family, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reincarnation of the dead, i. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in America, 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Australia, 99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rekub-el, Syrian god, i. 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Relations, spirits of near dead, worshipped, i. 175, 176;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at death become gods, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion, volcanic, i. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>how influenced by mother-kin, ii. <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and magic, combination of, i. 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and music, 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious ideals a product of the male imagination, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; systems, great permanent, founded by great men, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remission of sins through the shedding of blood, i. 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Remus, the birth of, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renan, E., on Tammuz and Adonis, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his excavations at Byblus, 14 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Adom-melech, 17;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the vale of the Adonis, 29 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the burnings for the kings of Judah, 178 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the discoloration of the river Adonis, 225 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the worship of Adonis, 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Renouf, Sir P. le Page, on Osiris as the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resemblance of the rites of Adonis to the festival of Easter, i. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 306</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resemblances of paganism to Christianity explained as diabolic counterfeits, i. 302, 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reshef, Semitic god, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection of the dead conceived on the pattern of the resurrection of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Attis at the vernal equinox, i. 272 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 307 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Hercules (Melcarth), i. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Osiris dramatically represented in his rites, ii. <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>depicted on the
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
monuments, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of its celebration at Rome, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>symbolized by the setting up of the <hi rend='italic'>ded</hi> pillar, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection of Tylon, i. 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhine, bathing in the, on St. John's Eve, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodes described by Strabo, i. 195 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of Helen in, 292</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodesia, Northern, the Bantu tribes of, their worship of ancestral spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of dead chiefs or kings, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhodians, the Venetians of antiquity, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rice, the soul of the, in the first sheaf cut, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ridgeway, Professor W., on the marriage of brothers with sisters, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rites of irrigation in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sowing, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of harvest, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ritual, children of living parents in, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the Bechuanas at founding a new town, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Adonis, i. 223 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivers as the seat of worship of deities, i. 160;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing in, at Midsummer, 246, 248, 249;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gods worshipped beside, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rivers, Dr. W. H. R., as to Melanesian theory of conception in women, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sacred dairyman of the Todas, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rizpah and her sons, i. 22</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Robinson, Edward, on the vale of the Adonis, i. 29 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roccacaramanico, in the Abruzzi, Easter ceremonies at, i. 256 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rock-hewn sculptures at Ibreez, i. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Boghaz-Keui, 129 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rockhill, W. Woodville, on dance of eunuchs in Corea, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rohde, E., on purification by blood, i. 299 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Hyacinth, 315</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman deities called <q>Father</q> and <q>Mother,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; emperor, funeral pyre of, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; expiation for prodigies, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; financial oppression, i. 301 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>genius</foreign> symbolized by a serpent, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; gods, the marriage of the, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>compared to Greek gods, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; law, revival of, i. 301</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; marriage custom, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mythology, fragments of, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans adopt the worship of the Phrygian Mother of the Gods, i. 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>correct the vague Egyptian year by intercalation, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rome, high-priest of Cybele at, i. 285;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the celebration of the resurrection of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romulus cut in pieces, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the birth of, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roper River, in Australia, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roscoe, Rev. John, on serpent-worship, i. 86 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the rebirth of the dead, 92 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on potters in Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the religion of the Bahima, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the worship of the dead among the Baganda, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Mukasa, the chief god of the Baganda, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on massacres for sick kings of Uganda, <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rose, the white, dyed red by the blood of Aphrodite, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosetta stone, the inscription, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roth, W. E., on belief in conception without sexual intercourse, i. 103 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rotomahana in New Zealand, pink terraces at, i. 207, 209 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rugaba, supreme god in Kiziba, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rules of life based on a theory of lunar influence, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rumina, a Roman goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Runes, how Odin learned the magic, i. 290</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russia, annual festivals of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Russian Midsummer custom, i. 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rustic Calendars, the Roman, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabazius, mysteries of, i. 90 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrament in the rites of Attis, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sacred'/>
<l>Sacred harlots in Asia Minor, i. 141</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; marriage of priest and priestess as representing god and goddess, i. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented in the rock-hewn sculptures at Boghaz-Keui, 140;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Cos, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; men</q> (<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>kedeshim</foreign>), at Jerusalem, i. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and women, 57 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in West Africa, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Western Asia, 72 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Andania, 76 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; prostitution, i. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>suggested origin of, 39 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Western Asia, alternative theory of, 55 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in India, 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in West Africa, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; slaves, i. 73, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; stocks and stones among the Semites, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women in India, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in West Africa, 65 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Western Asia, 70 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at Andania, 76 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifice of virginity, i. 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of virility in the rites of Attis and Astarte, 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other cases of, 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>nutritive and vicarious types of, ii. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices to earthquake god, i. 201, 202;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to volcanoes, 218 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to the dead distinguished from sacrifices to
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
the gods, 316 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered at the rising of Sirius, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered in connexion with irrigation, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to dead kings, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to ancestral spirits, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of animals to prolong the life of kings, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>without shedding of blood, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrifices, human, offered at earthquakes, i. 201;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>offered to Dionysus, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at the graves of the kings of Uganda, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to dead kings, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to dead chiefs, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to prolong the life of kings, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sadyattes, son of Cadys, viceroy of Lydia, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saffron at the Corycian cave, i. 154, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sago, magic for the growth of, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sahagun, B. de, on the ancient Mexican calendar, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Denys, his seven heads, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. George in Syria, reputed to bestow offspring on women, i. 78, 79, 90;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of, and the Parilia, 308, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John, Sweethearts of, in Sardinia, i. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John, Spenser, on reasons for head-hunting in Sarawak, i. 296</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. John's Day or Eve (Midsummer Day or Eve), custom of bathing on, i. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Midsummer festival in Sardinia, i. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; wort gathered at Midsummer, i. 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Kilda, All Saints' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Luke, the festival of, on October 18th, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saint-Maries, Midsummer custom at, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>S. Martinus Dumiensis, on the date of the Crucifixion in Gaul, i. 307 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Michael in Alaska, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Simon and St. Jude's day, October 28th, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>St. Vitus, festival of, i. 252</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saintonge, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saints as the givers of children to women, i. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 91, 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sais, the festival of, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sakkara, pyramids at, ii. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sal</foreign> tree, festival of the flower of the, i. 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salacia and Neptune, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salamis in Cyprus, human sacrifices at, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dynasty of Teucrids at, 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salem, Melchizedek, king of, i. 17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salii, priests of Mars, rule as to their election, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salono, a Hindoo festival, i. 243 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salvation of the individual soul, importance attached to, in Oriental religions, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samagitians, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samal, in North-Western Syria, i. 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samaria, the fall of, i. 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samoa, conduct of the inhabitants in an earthquake, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Samuel consulted about asses, i. 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of the name, 79</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Saul, i. 22</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>San Juan Capistrano, the Indians of, their ceremony at the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanda-Sarme, a Cilician king, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandacus, a Syrian, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandan of Tarsus, i. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burning of, 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 126;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Hercules, 125, 143, 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>monument of, at Tarsus, 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; (Sandon, Sandes), Cappadocian and Cilician god of fertility, i. 125</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Baal at Tarsus, i. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandon, or Sandan, name of the Lydian and Cilician Hercules, i. 182, 184, 185;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a Cilician name, 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sandu'arri, a Cilician king, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santa Felicita, successor of Mefitis, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santiago Tepehuacan, Indians of, their custom at sowing, i. 239;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Santorin, island of, its volcanic activity, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sappho on the mourning for Adonis, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saracus, last king of Assyria, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarawak, head-hunting in, i. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardanapalus, monument of, at Tarsus, i. 126 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his monument at Anchiale, 172;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the burning of, 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the effeminate, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Hercules, i. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardes, captured by Cyrus, i. 174;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>lion carried round acropolis of, i. 184, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sardinia, gardens of Adonis in, i. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sargal, in India, gardens of Adonis at, i. 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sarpedonian Artemis, i. 167, 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sasabonsun, earthquake god of Ashantee, i. 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturn, the husband of Ops, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Lua, ii. <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturn's period of revolution round the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saturnine temperament of the farmer, ii. <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sauks, an Indian tribe of North America, effeminate sorcerers among the, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>

<lg>
<l>Saul, burial of, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and David, i. 21</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saul's madness soothed by music, i. 53, 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savages lament for the animals and plants which they eat, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sâwan, Indian month, i. 242</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Saxons of Transylvania, harvest custom of the, i. 238</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sayce, A. H., on kings of Edom, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on name of David, 19 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schäfer, H., on the tomb of Osiris at Abydos, ii. <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schlanow, in Brandenburg, custom at sowing at, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schloss, Mr. Francis S., on the rule as to the felling of timber in Colombia, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schwegler, A., on the death of Romulus, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scipio, his fabulous birth, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scorpions, Isis and the, ii. <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scotland, harvest custom in, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scottish Highlanders on the influence of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythian king, human beings and horses sacrificed at his grave, i. 293</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scythians, their belief in immortality, i. 294;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their treatment of dead enemies, 294 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sea, custom of bathing in the, on St. John's Day or Eve, i. 246, 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sea-Dyaks'/>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Dyaks or Ibans of Borneo, their worship of serpents, i. 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their festivals of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>effeminate priests or sorcerers among the, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Dyaks of Sarawak, their reasons for taking human heads, i. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Season of festival a clue to the nature of a deity, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seasons, magical and religious theories of the, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seb (Keb or Geb), Egyptian earth-god, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Secret graves of kings, chiefs, and magicians, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sed festival in Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its date perhaps connected with the heliacal rising of Sirius, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>apparently intended to renew the king's life by identifying him with the dead and risen Osiris, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Segera, a sago magician of Kiwai, dismembered after death, ii. <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seker (Sokari), title of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seler, Professor E., on the ancient Mexican calendar, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seleucus, a grammarian, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Nicator, king, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Theologian, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-mutilation of Attis and his priests, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seligmann, Dr. C. G., on the five supplementary Egyptian days, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the divinity of Shilluk kings, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on custom of putting Shilluk kings to death, <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Selwanga, python-god of Baganda, i. 86</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semiramis at Hierapolis, i. 162 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a form of Ishtar (Astarte), 176 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to have burnt herself, 176 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the mythical, a form of the great Asiatic goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semites, agricultural, worship Baal as the giver of fertility, i. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred stocks and stones among the, 107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>traces of mother-kin among the, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Semitic gods, uniformity of their type, i. 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; kings, the divinity of, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as hereditary deities, 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; language, Egyptian language akin to the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; personal names indicating relationship to a deity, i. 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; worship of Tammuz and Adonis, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Semlicka</foreign>, festival of the dead among the Letts, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seneca, on the offerings of Egyptian priests to the Nile, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the marriage of the Roman gods, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Salacia as the wife of Neptune, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senegal and Niger region of West Africa, belief as to conception without sexual intercourse in, i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>myth of marriage of Sky and Earth in the, 282 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Senegambia, the Mandingoes of, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sennacherib, his siege of Jerusalem, i. 25;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>said to have built Tarsus, 173 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Separation of Earth and Sky, myth of the, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapeum at Alexandria, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its destruction, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapis, the later form of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the rise of the Nile attributed to, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the standard cubit kept in his temple, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serpent as the giver of children, i. 86;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>at rites of initiation, 90 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god married to human wives, i. 66 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to control the crops, 67</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Serpents'/>
<l>Serpents reputed the fathers of human beings, i. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as embodiments of Aesculapius, 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped in Mysore, 81 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as reincarnations of the dead, 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fed with milk, 84 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 87;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to have knowledge
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
of life-giving plants, 186;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>souls of dead kings incarnate in, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Servius, on the death of Attis, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the marriage of Orcus, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Salacia as the wife of Neptune, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Tullius, begotten by the fire-god, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sesostris, so-called monument of, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Set'/>
<l>Set, or Typhon, brother of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murders Osiris, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>accuses Osiris before the gods, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brings a suit of bastardy against Horus, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his combat with Horus, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reigns over Upper Egypt, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>torn in pieces, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Typhon'>Typhon</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sety I., King of Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamash, Babylonian sun-god, his human wives, i. 71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Semitic god, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shamashshumukin, King of Babylon, burns himself, i. 173 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shammuramat, Assyrian queen, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shans of Burma, their theory of earthquakes, i. 198;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>cut bamboos for building in the wane of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shark-shaped hero, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheaf, the first cut, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sheep to be shorn when the moon is waxing, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to be shorn in the waning of the moon, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sheitan dere</foreign>, the Devil's Glen, in Cilicia, i. 150</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shenty, Egyptian cow-goddess, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shifting dates of Egyptian festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shilluk kings put to death before their strength fails, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shilluks, their worship of dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their worship of Nyakang, the first of the Shilluk kings, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shoulders of medicine-men especially sensitive, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shouting as a means of stopping earthquakes, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shropshire, feast of All Souls in, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shu, Egyptian god of light, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shuswap Indians of British Columbia eat nutlets of pines, i. 278 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siam, catafalque burnt at funeral of king of, i. 179;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual festival of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siao, children sacrificed to volcano in, i. 219</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibitti-baal, king of Byblus, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibyl, the Grotto of the, at Marsala, i. 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibylline Books, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicily, Syrian prophet in, i. 74;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fossil bones in, 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hot springs in, 213;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of Adonis in, 245, 253 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divination at Midsummer in, 254;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Good Friday ceremonies in, 255 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sick people resort to cave of Pluto, i. 205 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sicyon, shrine of Aesculapius at, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sidon, kings of, as priests of Astarte, i. 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Siem</foreign>, king, among the Khasis of Assam, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sigai, hero in form of shark, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sihanaka, the, of Madagascar, funeral custom of the, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinai, <q>Mistress of Turquoise</q> at, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinews of sacrificial ox cut, ii. <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sins, the remission of, through the shedding of blood, i. 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sinsharishkun, last king of Assyria, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sipylus, Mother Plastene on Mount, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Siriac or Sothic period, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Sirius'/>
<l>Sirius (the Dog-star), observed by Egyptian astronomers, ii. <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called Sothis by the Egyptians, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>date of its rising in ancient Egypt, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>heliacal rising of, on July 20th, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its rising marked the beginning of the sacred Egyptian year, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>its rising observed in Ceos, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifices offered at its rising on the top of Mount Pelion, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the star of Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in connexion with the Sed festival, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sis in Cilicia, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sister of a god, i. 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sisters, kings marry their, i. 316</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sizu in Cilicia, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skin, bathing in dew at Midsummer as remedy for diseases of the, i. 247, 248;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ox stuffed and set up, 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>body of Egyptian dead placed in a bull's, ii. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of sacrificial victim used in the rite of the new birth, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skinner, Principal J., on the burnt sacrifice of children, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skins of human victims, uses made of, i. 293;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of horses stuffed and set up at graves, 293, 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Skull, drinking out of a king's, in order to be inspired by his spirit, ii. <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sky conceived by the Egyptians as a cow, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and earth, myth of their violent separation, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god, Attis as a, i. 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>married to Earth-goddess, 282, with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mutilation of the, 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slaughter of prisoners often a sacrifice to the gods, i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slave Coast of West Africa, sacred men and women on the, i. 65, 68;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ewe-speaking peoples of the, 83 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slaves, sacred, in Western Asia, i. 39 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<lg>
<l>Slaying of the Dragon by Apollo at Delphi, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sleep of the god in winter, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smell, evil, used to avert demons, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smeroe, Mount, volcano in Java, i. 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, George Adam, on fertility of Bethlehem, i. 257 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, W. Robertson, on the date of the month Tammuz, i. 10 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on anointing as consecration, 21 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Baal as god of fertility, 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on caves in Semitic religion, 169 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Tophet, 177 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the predominance of goddesses over gods in early Semitic religion, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sacrifice of children to Moloch, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smoking as a mode of inducing inspiration, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snake-entwined goddess found at Gournia, i. 88</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snakes as fathers of human beings, i. 82;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fed with milk, 84 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Serpents'>Serpents</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Snorri Sturluson, on the dismemberment of Halfdan the Black, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sobk, a crocodile-shaped Egyptian god, identified with the sun, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sochit</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Sochet</foreign>, epithet of Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Society, ancient, built on the principle of the subordination of the individual to the community, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socrates (church historian) on sacred prostitution, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Söderblom, N., on an attempted reform of the old Iranian religion, ii. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sodom and Gomorrah, the destruction of, i. 222 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soerakarta, district of Java, conduct of natives in an earthquake, i. 202 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sokari (Seker), a title of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Sol invictus</foreign>, i. 304 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Solanum campylanthum</foreign>, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solomon, King, puts Adoni-jah to death, i. 51 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Baths of, i. 78;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Moab, 215 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Solstice, the summer, the Nile rises at the, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the winter, reckoned the Nativity of the Sun, i. 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian ceremony at, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Somali, marriage custom of the, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Son of a god, i. 51</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sons of God, i. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophocles on the burning of Hercules, i. 111</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorcerers or priests, order of effeminate, ii. <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sorrowful One, the vaults of the, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sothic or Siriac period, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sothis, Egyptian name for the star Sirius, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Sirius'>Sirius</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul of a tree in a bird, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of the rice in the first sheaf cut, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; of Osiris,</q> a bird, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -cakes eaten at the feast of All Souls in Europe, ii. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Souling,</q> custom of, on All Souls' Day in England, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; Day</q> in Shropshire, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Souls of the dead, reincarnation of the, i. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>brought back among the Gonds, 95 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, feasts of All, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>South Slavs, devices of women to obtain offspring, i. 96;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage customs of, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowers and ploughmen drenched with water as a rain-charm, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sowing, Prussian custom at, i. 238 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rites of, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and ploughing, ceremony of, in the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and planting, regulated by the phases of the moon, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sozomenus, church historian, on sacred prostitution, i. 37</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, bathing on St. John's Eve in, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sparta destroyed by an earthquake, i. 196 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spartans, their attempt to stop an earthquake, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; their flute-band, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; their uniform red, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; at Thermopylae, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; their regard for the full moon, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; their brides dressed as men on the wedding night, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer, Baldwin, on reincarnation of the dead, i. 100 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spencer, B., and Gillen, F. J., on Australian belief in conception without sexual intercourse, i. 99</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spermus, king of Lydia, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spieth, J., on the Ewe peoples, i. 70 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirit animals supposed to enter women and be born from them, i. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -children left by ancestors, i. 100 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spirits supposed to consort with women, i. 91;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of ancestors in the form of animals, 83;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of forefathers thought to dwell in rivers, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of dead chiefs worshipped by the whole tribe, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>thought to control the rain, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophesy through living men and women, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reincarnated in animals, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Ancestral-Spirits'>Ancestral spirits</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spring called Persephone, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<lg>
<l>Springs, worship of hot, i. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>bathing in, at Midsummer, 246, 247, 248, 249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staffordshire, All Souls' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Standard, Egyptian, resembling a placenta, ii. <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stanikas, male children of sacred prostitutes, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Star of Bethlehem, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Salvation, i. 258</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spangled cap of Attis, i. 284</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Steinn in Hringariki, barrow of Halfdan at, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Stella Maris</foreign>, an epithet of the Virgin Mary, ii. <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stengel, P., on sacrificial ritual of Eleusis, i. 292 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stlatlum Indians of British Columbia respect the animals and plants which they eat, ii. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stocks, sacred, among the Semites, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stones, holed, custom of passing through, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>to commemorate the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, sacred, anointed, i. 36;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Semites, 107 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Khasis, 108 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strabo, on the concubines of Ammon, i. 72;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Albanian moon-god, 73 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Castabala, 168 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his description of the Burnt Land of Lydia, 193;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the frequency of earthquakes at Philadelphia, 195;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his description of Rhodes, 195 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Nysa, 206 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the priests of Pessinus, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stratonicea in Caria, eunuch priest at, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rule as to the pollution of death at, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>String music in religion, i. 54</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Su-Mu, a tribe of Southern China, said to be governed by a woman, ii. <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Subordination of the individual to the community, the principle of ancient society, i. 300</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Substitutes for human sacrifices, i. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 285, 289, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Succession to the crown under mother-kin (female kinship), i. 44, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sudan, the negroes of, their regard for the phases of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sudanese, their conduct in an earthquake, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Suffetes</foreign> of Carthage, i. 116</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sugar-bag totem, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suicides, custom observed at graves of, i. 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ghosts of, feared, 292 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suk, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82, 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sulla at Aedepsus, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumatra, the Bataks of, i. 199, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Loeboes of, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumba, East Indian island, annual festival of the New Year and of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sumerians, their origin and civilization, i. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Summer on the Mediterranean rainless, i. 159 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; called Aphrodite, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; festival of Adonis, i. 226, 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sun, temple of the, at Baalbec, i. 163;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adonis interpreted as the, 228;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Nativity of the, at the winter solstice, 303 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris interpreted as the, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>called <q>the eye of Horus,</q> <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worshipped in Egypt, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the power of regeneration ascribed to the, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>salutations to the rising, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and earth, annual marriage of, i. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god annually married to Earth-goddess, i. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Egyptian, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hymns to the, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -goddess of the Hittites, i. 133 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Unconquered, Mithra identified with, i. 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superiority of the goddess in the myths of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of goddesses over gods in societies organized on mother-kin, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>legal, of women over men in ancient Egypt, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supplementary days, five, in the Egyptian year, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the ancient Mexican year, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in the old Iranian year, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supreme gods in Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, with note 5, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Swastika</foreign>, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweden, May-pole or Midsummer-tree in, i. 250;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer bride and bridegroom in, 251;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>kings of, answerable for the fertility of the ground, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marriage custom in, to ensure the birth of a boy, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Sweethearts of St. John</q> in Sardinia, i. 244 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Swine'/>
<l>Swine not eaten by people of Pessinus, i. 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not eaten by worshippers of Adonis, 265;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>not allowed to enter Comana in Pontus, 265.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Pigs'>Pigs</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sword, girls married to a, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sycamore, effigy of Osiris placed on boughs of, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacred to Osiris, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syene (Assuan), inscriptions at, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symbolism, coarse, of Osiris and Dionysus, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>

<lg>
<l>Symmachus, on the festival of the Great Mother, i. 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syracuse, the Blue Spring at, i. 213 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syria, Adonis in, i. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>holy men</q> in, 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>hot springs resorted to by childless women in, 213 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>subject to earthquakes, 222 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Nativity of the Sun at the winter solstice in, 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>turning money at the new moon in, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syrian god Hadad, i. 15</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; peasants believe that women can conceive without sexual intercourse, i. 91</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; women apply to saints for offspring, i. 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; writer on the reasons for assigning Christmas to the twenty-fifth of December, i. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tâ-uz (Tammuz), mourned by Syrian women in Harran, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taanach, burial of children in jars at, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tacitus as to German observation of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taenarum in Laconia, Poseidon worshipped at, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talaga Bodas, volcano in Java, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talbot, P. Amaury, on self-mutilation, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Talismans, crowns and wreaths as, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamarisk, sacred to Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tami, the, of German New Guinea, their theory of earthquakes, i. 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamil temples, dancing-girls in, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tamirads, diviners, i. 42</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tammuz, i. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>equivalent to Adonis, 6 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his worship of Sumerian origin, 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>meaning of the name, 8;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q>true son of the deep water,</q> 8, 246;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>laments for, 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the month of, 10 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, 230;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>mourned for at Jerusalem, 11, 17, 20;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as a corn-spirit, 230;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his bones ground in a mill and scattered to the wind, 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Ishtar, i. 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tangkul Nagas of Assam, their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanjore, dancing-girls at, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tantalus murders his son Pelops, i. 181</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tark, Tarku, Trok, Troku, syllables in names of Cilician priests, i. 144;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps the name of a Hittite deity, 147;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>perhaps the name of the god of Olba, 148, 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarkimos, priest of Corycian Zeus, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarkondimotos, name of two Cilician kings, i. 145 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarkuaris, priest of Corycian Zeus, i. 145;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priestly king of Olba, 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarkudimme or Tarkuwassimi, name on Hittite seal, i. 145 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarkumbios, priest of Corycian Zeus, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tarsus, climate and fertility of, i. 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>school of philosophy at, 118;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sandan and Baal at, 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 161;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priesthood of Hercules at, 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fortune of the City on coins of, 164;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>divine triad at, 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Baal of, i. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Sandan of, i. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tat</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>tatu</foreign> pillar. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Ded'><foreign rend='italic'>Ded</foreign> pillar</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tate, H. R., on serpent-worship, i. 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tattoo-marks of priests, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taurians of the Crimea, their use of the heads of prisoners, i. 294</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Taurobolium</foreign> in the rites of Cybele, i. 274 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>or <foreign rend='italic'>Tauropolium</foreign>, 275 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taurus mountains, i. 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tears of Isis thought to swell the Nile, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>rain thought to be the tears of gods, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tegea, tombstones at, i. 87</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telamon, father of Teucer, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tell-el-Amarna letters, i. 16 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, 21 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the new capital of King Amenophis IV., ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tell Ta'annek (Taanach), burial of children in jars at, i. 109 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tempe, the Vale of, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temple-tombs of kings, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Temples of dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tenggereese of Java sacrifice to volcano, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tentyra (Denderah), temple of Osiris at, ii. <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ternate, the sultan of, his sacrifice of human victims to a volcano, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertullian on the fasts of Isis and Cybele, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the date of the Crucifixion, 306 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teshub or Teshup, name of Hittite god, i. 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 148 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teso, the, of Central Africa, medicine-men dressed as women among the, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testicles of rams in the rites of Attis, i. 269 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of bull used in rites of Cybele and Attis, 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Têt, New Year festival in Annam, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tet</foreign> pillar. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Ded'><foreign rend='italic'>Ded</foreign> pillar</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teti, king of Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teucer, said to have instituted human sacrifice, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Ajax, names of priestly kings of Olba, i. 144 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 148, 161</l>
</lg>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<lg>
<l>Teucer, son of Tarkuaris, priestly king of Olba, i. 151, 157</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, son of Telamon, founds Salamis in Cyprus, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, son of Zenophanes, high-priest of Olbian Zeus, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teucrids, dynasty at Salamis in Cyprus, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teutonic year reckoned from October 1st, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thargelion, an Attic month, ii. <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theal, G. McCall, on the worship of ancestors among the Bantus, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theban priests, their determination of the solar year, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thebes in Boeotia, stone lion at, i. 184 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of the Laurel-bearing at, ii. <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; in Egypt, temple of Ammon at, i. 72;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Memnonium at, ii. 35 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Valley of the Kings at, 90</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theias, a Syrian king, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>father of Adonis, 55 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theism late in human history, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theocracy in the Pelew Islands, tendency to, ii. <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theopompus on the names of the seasons, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thera, worship of the Mother of the Gods in, i. 280 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thermopylae, the Spartans at, i. 197 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the hot springs of, 210 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thesmophoria, i. 43 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrifice to serpents at the, 88;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>pine-cones at the, 278;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fast of the women at the, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thetis and her infant son, i. 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thirty years, the Sed festival held nominally at intervals of, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thonga, Bantu tribe of South Africa, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their presentation of infants to the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worship of the dead among the, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; chiefs buried secretly, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thongs, legends as to new settlements enclosed by, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thoth, Egyptian god of wisdom, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>teaches Isis a spell to restore the dead to life, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>restores the eye of Horus, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thoth, the first month of the Egyptian year, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thracian villages, custom at Carnival in, ii. <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Threshing corn by oxen, ii. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Threshold, burial of infants under the, i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thucydides on military music, i. 196 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the sailing of the fleet for Syracuse, 226 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Θύειν distinguished from ἐναγίζειν, i. 316 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thunder and lightning, sacrifices to, i. 157;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Syrian, Assyrian, Babylonian, and Hittite god of, 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -god of the Hittites, with a bull and an axe as his emblems, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; totem, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thunderbolt, as emblem of Hittite god, i. 134, 136;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as divine emblem, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and ears of corn, emblem of god Hadad, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thurston, Edgar, on dancing-girls in India, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thyatira, hero Tyrimnus at, i. 183 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thymbria, sanctuary of Charon at, i. 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius, the Emperor, persecuted the Egyptian religion, ii. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tibullus, on the rising of Sirius, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiele, C. P., on rock-hewn sculptures at Boghaz-Keui, i. 140 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the death of Saracus, 174 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the nature of Osiris, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiger's ghost, deceiving a, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiglath-Pileser III., king of Assyria, i. 14, 16, 163 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tii, Egyptian queen, mother of Amenophis IV., ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tille, A., on beginning of Teutonic winter, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timber felled in the waning of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timor, theory of earthquakes in, i. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timotheus, on the death of Attis, i. 264 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiru-kalli-kundram, dancing-girls at, i. 61</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titane, shrine of Aesculapius at, i. 81</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tobolbel</foreign>, in the Pelew Islands, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tod, J., on rites of goddess Gouri, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Todas of the Neilgherry Hills, custom as to the pollution of death observed by sacred dairyman among the, ii. <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Togo-land, West Africa, the Ewe people of, i. 282 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Ho tribe of, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tomb of Midas, i. 286;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of Hyacinth, 314</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tombs of the kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of kings sacred, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tongans, their theory of an earthquake, i. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tongue of sacrificial ox cut out, ii. <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tonquin, annual festival of the dead in, ii. <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tophet, at Jerusalem, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toradjas of Central Celebes, their theory of rain, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torres Straits Islands, worship of animal-shaped heroes in the, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death-dances in the, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>

<lg>
<l>Totemism in Kiziba, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Toulon, Midsummer custom at, i. 248 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Town, charm to protect a, ii. <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tozer, H. F., on Mount Argaeus, i. 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Traditions of kings torn in pieces, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tralles in Lydia, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transference of Egyptian festivals from one month to the preceding month, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transformation of men into women, attempted, in obedience to dreams, ii. <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of women into men, attempted, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transition from mother-kin to father-kin, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transylvania, harvest customs among the Roumanians and Saxons of, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travancore, dancing-girls in, i. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Treason, old English punishment of, i. 290 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tree decked with bracelets, anklets, etc., i. 240;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>soul of a, in a bird, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of life in Eden, i. 186 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -bearers (<foreign rend='italic'>Dendrophori</foreign>) in the worship of Cybele and Attis, i. 266 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -spirit, Osiris as a, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trees, spirit-children awaiting birth in, i. 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>sacrificial victims hung on, 146;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>represented on the monuments of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>felled in the waning of the moon, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>growing near the graves of dead kings revered, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and rocks, Greek belief as to birth from, i. 107 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Triad, divine, at Tarsus, i. 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trident, emblem of Hittite thunder-god, i. 134, 135;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>emblem of Indian deity, 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tristram, H. B., on date of the corn-reaping in Palestine, i. 232 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trobriands, the, i. 84</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trokoarbasis, priest of Corycian Zeus, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trokombigremis, priest of Corycian Zeus, i. 145</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>True of speech,</q> epithet of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trumpets, blowing of, in the rites of Attis, i. 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tshi-speaking peoples of the Gold Coast, dedicated men and women among the, i. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>ordeal of chastity among the, 115 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their annual festival of the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tubilustrium</foreign> at Rome, i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tulava, sacred prostitution in, i. 63</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tully River, in Queensland, belief of the natives as to conception without sexual intercourse, i. 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tum of Heliopolis, an Egyptian sun-god, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turner, George, on sacred stones, i. 108 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Turquoise, Mistress of,</q> at Sinai, i. 53</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tusayan Indians, their custom at planting, i. 239</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tuscany, volcanic district of, i. 208 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tusser, Thomas, on planting peas and beans, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twin, the navel-string of the King of Uganda called his Twin, ii. <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Twins, precautions taken by women at the graves of, i. 93 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Two-headed deity, i. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyana, Hittite monument at, i. 122 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tybi, an Egyptian month, ii. <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tylon or Tylus, a Lydian hero, i. 183;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his death and resurrection, 186 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tylor, Sir Edward B., on fossil bones as a source of myths, i. 157 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on names for father and mother, 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Typhon'/>
<l>Typhon slays Hercules, i. 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Corycian cave of, 155 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his battle with the gods, 193, 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Zeus, battle of, i. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, or Set, the brother of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>murders Osiris, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>and mangles his body, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>interpreted as the sun, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Set'>Set</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyre, Melcarth at, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>burning of Melcarth at, 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>festival of <q>the awakening of Hercules</q> at, 111;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>king of, his walk on stones of fire, 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, kings of, their divinity, i. 16;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as priests of Astarte, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrimnus, axe-bearing hero at Thyatira, i. 183 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyrol, feast of All Souls in the, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tyropoeon, ravine at Jerusalem, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ucayali River, the Conibos of the, i. 198;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their greetings to the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uganda, the country of the Baganda, ii. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temples of the dead kings of, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human sacrifices offered to prolong the lives of the kings of, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Baganda'>Baganda</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uncle, dead, worshipped, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, maternal, in marriage ceremonies in India, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uncleanness caused by contact with the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unconquered Sun, Mithra identified with the, i. 304</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unis, king of Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<lg>
<l>Unkulunkulu, <q>the Old-Old-one,</q> the first man in the traditions of the Zulus, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unnefer, <q>the Good Being,</q> a title of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Unspoken water</q> in marriage rites, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Upsala, human sacrifices in the holy grove at, i. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 220;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the reign of Frey at, 100</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Up-uat, Egyptian jackal-god, ii. <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uranus castrated by Cronus, i. 283</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Uri-melech or Adom-melech, king of Byblus, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Usirniri, temple of, at Busiris, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valesius, on the standard Egyptian cubit, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vallabha, an Indian sect, men assimilated to women in the, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valley of Hinnom, sacrifices to Moloch, in the, i. 178</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Kings at Thebes, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Poison, in Java, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vancouver Island, the Ahts of, ii. <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vapours, worship of mephitic, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Varro, on the marriage of the Roman gods, ii. <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his derivation of <hi rend='italic'>Dialis</hi> from Jove, <ref target='Pg230'>230</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Salacia, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Fauna or the Good Goddess, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vase-painting of Croesus on the pyre, i. 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatican, worship of Cybele and Attis on the site of the, i. 275 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vegetable and animal life associated in primitive mind, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vegetation, mythical theory of the growth and decay of, i. 3 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>annual decay and revival of, represented dramatically in the rites of Adonis, 227 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>gardens of Adonis charms to promote the growth of, 236 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 239;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Midsummer fires and couples in relation to, 250 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Attis as a god of, 277 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Osiris as a god of, ii. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Veins of the Nile,</q> near Philae, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venus, the planet, identified with Astarte, i. 258, ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Vulcan, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venus, the bearded, in Cyprus, ii. <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vernal festival of Adonis, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Verrall, A. W., on the <foreign rend='italic'>Anthesteria</foreign>, i. 235 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vertumnus and Pomona, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vestal Virgin, mother of Romulus and Remus, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Virgins, rule as to their election, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicarious sacrifices for kings, ii. <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vicarious and nutritive types of sacrifice, ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victims, sacrificial, hung on trees, i. 146</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victoria Nyanza Lake, Mukasa the god of the, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Victory, temple of, on the Palatine Hill at Rome, i. 265</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Viehe, Rev. G., on the worship of the dead among the Herero, ii. <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vine, the cultivation of, introduced by Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vintage festival, Oschophoria, at Athens, ii. <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rites at Athens, ii. <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Violets sprung from the blood of Attis, i. 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virbius or Dianus at Nemi, i. 45</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgin, the Heavenly, mother of the Sun, i. 303</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; birth of Perseus, i. 302 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mary and Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mother, the Phrygian Mother Goddess as a, i. 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; mothers, tales of, i. 264;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>of gods and heroes, 107</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virginity, sacrifice of, i. 60;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>recovered by bathing in a spring, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgins supposed to conceive through eating certain food, i. 96</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virility, sacrifice of, in the rites of Attis and Astarte, i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 270 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>other cases of, 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitrolles, bathing at Midsummer at, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Viza, in Thrace, Carnival custom at, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volcanic region of Cappadocia, i. 189 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; religion, i. 188 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volcanoes, the worship of, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>human victims thrown into, 219 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vosges, the Upper, rule as to the shearing of sheep in, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Mountains, feast of All Souls in the, ii. <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Votiaks of Russia, annual festivals of the dead among the, ii. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Voyage in boats of papyrus in the rites of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vulcan, the fire-god, father of Caeculus, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the husband of Maia or Majestas, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his Flamen, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Venus, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wabisa, Bantu tribe of Rhodesia, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wabondei, of Eastern Africa, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their rule as to the cutting of posts for building, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wachsmuth, C., on Easter ceremonies in the Greek Church, i. 254</l>
</lg>

<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>

<lg>
<l>Wagogo, the, of German East Africa, their ceremony at the new moon, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wahehe, a Bantu tribe of German East Africa, the worship of the dead among the, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their belief in a supreme god Nguruhe, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wailing of women for Adonis, i. 224</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wajagga of German East Africa, their way of appeasing ghosts of suicides, i. 292 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their human sacrifices at irrigation, ii. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wales, All Souls' Day in, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wallachia, harvest custom in, i. 237</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wamara, a worshipful dead king, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waning of the moon, theories to account for the, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>time for felling timber, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>War, sacrifice of a blind bull before going to, ii. <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; -dance of king before the ghosts of his ancestors, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warner, Mr., on Caffre ideas about lightning, ii. <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warramunga of Central Australia, their belief in the reincarnation of the dead, i. 100;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their tradition of purification by fire, 180 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warts supposed to be affected by the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Water thrown on the last corn cut, a rain-charm, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>marvellous properties attributed to, at Midsummer (the festival of St. John), 246 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>prophetic, drunk on St. John's Eve, 247</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Life, i. 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waterbrash, a Huzul cure for, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wave accompanying earthquake, i. 202 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weaning of children, belief as to the, in Angus, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weavers, caste of, i. 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weeks, Rev. J. H., on inconsistency of savage thought, i. 5 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the names for the supreme god among many tribes of Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Wellalaick</foreign>, festival of the dead among the Letts, ii. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wen-Ammon, Egyptian traveller, i. 14, 75 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>West, Oriental religions in the, i. 298 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Westermann, D., on the worship of Nyakang among the Shilluks, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whalers, their bodies cut up and used as charms, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wheat forced for festival, i. 243, 244, 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and barley, the cultivation of, introduced by Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>discovered by Isis, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whip made of human skin used in ceremonies for the prolongation of the king's life, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg225'>225</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whitby, All Souls' Day at, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White, Rev. G. E., on dervishes of Asia Minor, i. 170</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White, Miss Rachel Evelyn (Mrs. Wedd), on the position of women in ancient Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>White the colour of Upper Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; birds, souls of dead kings incarnate in, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; bull, soul of a dead king incarnate in a, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Crown of Upper Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>worn by Osiris, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; roses dyed red by the blood of Aphrodite, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Whydah, King of, his worship of serpents, i. 67;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>serpents fed at, 86 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wicked after death, fate of the, in Egyptian religion, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Widow-burning in Greece, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Widowed Flamen, the, ii. <ref target='Pg227'>227</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiedemann, Professor A., on Wen-Ammon, i. 76 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the Egyptian name of Isis, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wigtownshire, harvest custom in, i. 237 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiimbaio tribe of South-Eastern Australia, their medicine-men, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilkinson, Sir J. G., on corn-stuffed effigies of Osiris, ii. <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wilson, C. T., and R. W. Felkin, on the worship of the dead kings of Uganda, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winckler, H., his excavations at Boghaz-Keui, i. 125 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>, 135 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winged deities, i. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; disc as divine emblem, i. 132</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winnowing-fans, ashes of human victims scattered by, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Winter called Cronus, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; sleep of the god, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; solstice reckoned the Nativity of the Sun, i. 303;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Egyptian ceremony at the, ii. <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wissowa, Professor G., on introduction of Phrygian rites at Rome, i. 267 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Orcus, ii. <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Ops and Consus, <ref target='Pg233'>233</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on the marriage of the Roman gods, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wives of dead kings sacrificed at their tombs, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wives, human, of gods, i. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, ii. <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>in Western Asia and Egypt, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wiwa chiefs reincarnated in pythons, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wogait, Australian tribe, their belief in conception without cohabitation, i. 103</l>
</lg>

<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>

<lg>
<l>Woman feeding serpent in Greek art, i. 87 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>as inspired prophetess of a god, ii. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Woman's dress assumed by men to deceive dangerous spirits, ii. <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women pass through holed stones as cure for barrenness, i. 36, with <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnated by dead saints, 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnated by serpents, 80 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>fear to be impregnated by ghosts, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnated by the flower of the banana, 93;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excluded from sacrifices to Hercules, 113 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their high importance in the social system of the Pelew Islanders, ii. <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the cultivation of the staple food in the hands of women (Pelew Islands), <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their social importance increased by the combined influence of mother-kin and landed property, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their legal superiority to men in ancient Egypt, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>impregnated by fire, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>priests dressed as, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as men, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>excluded from sacrifices to Hercules, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as men at marriage, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>dressed as men at circumcision, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See also</hi> <ref target='Index-Barrenness'>Barrenness</ref>, <ref target='Index-Childless'>Childless</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>and</hi> <ref target='Index-Sacred'>Sacred Women</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; as prophetesses inspired by dead chiefs, ii. <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>inspired by gods, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, living, regarded as the wives of dead kings, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>reputed the wives of gods, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women's hair, sacrifice of, i. 38</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Wororu</foreign>, man supposed to cause conception in women without sexual intercourse, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worship of ancestral spirits among the Bantu tribes of Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Khasis of Assam, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the dead perhaps fused with the propitiation of the corn-spirit, i. 233 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Bantu tribes, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of dead kings and chiefs in Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>among the Barotse, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>an important element in African religion, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of hot springs, i. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of mephitic vapours, i. 203 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of volcanoes, i. 216 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Worshippers of Osiris forbidden to injure fruit-trees and to stop up wells, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Wounds between the arms</q> of Hebrew prophets, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>&mdash;&mdash; of the Naaman,</q> Arab name for the scarlet anemone, i. 226</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wreaths as amulets, ii. <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wünsch, R., on the <foreign rend='italic'>Anthesteria</foreign>, i. 235 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on modern survivals of festivals of Adonis, 246;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on Easter ceremonies in the Greek church, 254 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wyse, W., ii. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophanes of Colophon on the Egyptian rites of mourning for gods, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yam, island of Torres Straits, heroes worshipped in animal forms in, i. 139 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yap, one of the Caroline Islands, prostitution of unmarried girls in, ii. <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yarilo, a personification of vegetation, i. 253</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Year, length of the solar, determined by the Theban priests, ii. <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the fixed Alexandrian, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Celtic, reckoned from November 1st, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Egyptian, a vague year, not corrected by intercalation, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of God, a Sothic period, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>began with the rising of Sirius, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the old Iranian, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Julian, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, the Teutonic, reckoned from October 1st, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yehar-baal, king of Byblus, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yehaw-melech, king of Byblus, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ynglings, a Norse family, descended from Frey, ii. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yombe, a Bantu tribe of Northern Rhodesia, their sacrifice of first-fruits to the dead, ii. <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Youth restored by the witch Medea, i. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yucatan, calendar of the Indians of, ii. <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yukon River in Alaska, ii. <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yungman tribe of Australia, their belief as to the birth of children, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Yuruks, pastoral people of Cilicia, i. 150 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zambesi, the Barotse of the, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zas, name of priest of Corycian Zeus, i. 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zechariah, on the mourning of or for Hadadrimmon, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>on wounds of prophet, 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zekar-baal, king of Byblus, i. 14</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zend-Avesta</hi>, on the Fravashis, ii. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zenjirli in Syria, Hittite sculptures at, i. 134;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>statue of horned god at, 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zer, old Egyptian king, his true Horus name Khent, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Khent'>Khent</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zerka, river in Moab, i. 215 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>

<lg>
<l>Zeus, god of Tarsus assimilated to, i. 119, 143;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cilician deity assimilated to, 144 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 148, 152;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the flower of, 186, 187;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>identified with Attis, 282;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>castrates his father Cronus, 283;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the father of dew, ii. <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the Saviour of the City, at Magnesia on the Maeander, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Corycian, priests of, i. 145, 155;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>temple of, 155</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Hecate at Stratonicea in Caria, i. 270 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 227</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Labrandeus, the Carian, i. 182</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Olbian, ruins of his temple at Olba, i. 151;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his cave or chasm, 158 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>his priest Teucer, 159;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a god of fertility, 159 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;, Olybrian, i. 167 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Papas, i. 281 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus and Typhon, battle of, i. 156 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 160</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimmern, H., on Mylitta, i. 37 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zimri, king of Israel, burns himself, i. 174 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, 176</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zion, Mount, traditionally identified with Mount Moriah, ii. <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zoroastrian fire-worship in Cappadocia, i. 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulu medicine-men or diviners, i. 74 <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, 75;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their charm to fertilize fields, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zulus, their belief in serpents as reincarnations of the dead, i. 82, 84;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their observation of the moon, ii. <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>the worship of the dead among the, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>their sacrifice of a bull to prolong the life of the king, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
